

===== PAGE 1 =====

i
Proposed 
Biennial Budget
FY 2025-27

===== PAGE 2 =====

ii
CITY COUNCIL
Lana Negrete, Mayor 
Caroline Torosis, Mayor Pro-Tempore 
Jesse Zwick, Councilmember 
Dan Hall, Councilmember  
Ellis Raskin, Councilmember 
Barry Snell, Councilmember
Natalya Zernitskaya, Councilmember
EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT
Elaine Polachek, Interim City Manager 
Susan Cline, Assistant City Manager 
Christopher J. Smith, Deputy City Manager 
BUDGET PREPARATION
FINANCE STAFF
Oscar Santiago, Director of Finance 
Jennifer Young, Budget Manager 
Lori Koh, Principal Budget Analyst 
Patrick Gregorian, Senior Budget Analyst 
Andrew Lee, Senior Budget Analyst 
Laura Perez, Budget Analyst
Hector Ayala, Acting Budget Analyst 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM STAFF
Rick Valte, Director of Public Works 
Sybille Moen, Administrative Services Officer
Heidi Duran, Principal Administrative Analyst
Yolanda Nunez, Principal Administrative Analyst
Cover Photo Credit: Sean Paul Franget 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET

===== PAGE 3 =====

iii
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City Manager’s Message 1
En Español 12
Measure K Enhancements 23
Priority 
Areas & Performance Measures
 38
Department Workplans 48
Santa Monica at a Glance 94
Budget Overview
 
___
 99
Overall Economic Conditions 99
Citywide Budget Overview 105
Major Gener
al Fund Tax Base Projections 113
Fund Balances 116
Classification of Funds 116
Fund Balance Projections 120
Fund Balance Projections (FY 2025-26) 121
Fund Balance Projections
 (FY 2026-27) 123
Revenues 125
Summary by Category and Fund (FY 2025-26) 125
Summary by Category and Fund (FY 2026-27) 126
Five-Y
ear Revenue Summary 127
Overview 133
Revenue 
Analysis, General Fund 135
Revenue 
Analysis, Other Funds 144
Expenditures 159
Expenditure Summary by Fund (FY 2025-26) 159
Expenditure Summary by Fund (FY 2026-27) 160
Five-Y
ear Expenditure Summary 161
Departmental Summaries 169
City Council 169
City Manager 171
City Attorney 173
Records and Election Services (City Clerk) 176
Community Development 179
Finance 183
Fire 186
Housing and Human Services 190
Human Resources 193

===== PAGE 4 =====

iv
 Information Services           196
 Library              198
 Police          201
 Public Works             205
 Recreation and Arts           210
 Department of Transportation           213
 Non-Departmental 219
Personnel and Staffing           222
 Organizational Chart            222
 Summary of Personnel by Fund           223
 Personnel by Department and Division          228
Capital Improvement Program         262
 Proposed Addendum to FY 2024-26 CIP Budget        262
 FY 2025-26 Proposed Budget by Fund         277
 FY 2025-26 Unfunded Projects         283
Appendix            286
 Targeted Budget Enhancements         286
 Budget Calendar         291
 Fiscal Policies           292
 Debt Financing Summary          316
  Summary of Long-term Indebtedness       317
  Debt Service Schedule          318
  Bond Ratings           319
 Glossary            320
 Acronyms           333
 GFOA Award           336
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
TABLE OF CONTENTS

===== PAGE 5 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CiTY MANAGER’S MESSAGE

===== PAGE 6 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
1
A CHALLENGING ENVIRONMENT
At the outset of the FY 2025-2027 biennial budget period, the city of Santa Monica faces many financial pressures.  
The city has two emergency orders in place – one supporting the response to the devastating January 2025 wildfires 
and one addressing the regional homelessness emergency.  
i
n addition to these orders, the city continues to face 
unprecedented legal liabilities and extreme uncertainty from shifts in federal government policies impacting funding 
for city and local non-profit services, tourism, and the economy and inflation generally.  
We see and hear the impacts of these pressures on our regional neighbors and at the State, all having to make difficult 
budgetary decisions.  Santa Monica is no exception.  
These pressures along with the lingering economic downturn stemming from the CO
vi
D-19 pandemic are impacting 
major revenue streams such as sales tax, transient occupancy tax, and parking revenues, which are all down or holding 
flat.  The city also continues to face unprecedented legal liabilities at a time when it operates with extremely low 
financial reserves driven by settlements in cases of sexual abuse from a former employee and continued litigation of 
the California 
voter Rights 
Amendment case.  The result is the city will have an operational deficit over the next five-
year period, requiring the use of $60.5 million in reserves to balance the budget.  
The FY 2025-2027 budget therefore is one focused on resiliency – resiliency to withstand the economic disruption 
of the fires and the economic uncertainty expected over the next few years.  The budget does maintain city services 
and programs but caps growth across all departments and implements other cost saving measures to mitigate the 
impacts of the operational deficit.  The capital improvement program also remains underfunded and budget estimates 
for funded projects are put at risk with potential cost increases due to tariffs, uncertainty around federal funding and 
other factors.  Finally, this budget must also take into consideration successor labor agreements for all 11 bargaining 
units that must carefully balance the needs of the workforce with the financial uncertainty of the immediate future.
The FY 2023-2025 budget funded the largest restoration of city programs and services following the 2020 pandemic.  
The city was able to partially restore youth and senior programming, extend permit counter service hours, resume in 
person services at the housing service counter, reopen library branches and expand hours, invest in a new permitting 
and land use management system, add security to downtown parking structures, restore crossing guards at schools, as 
well as restore some staffing and supplies to support the maintenance of our parks and public facilities.  Continuation 
of these expansion efforts must be paused at this time.  
i
nstead, the proposed budget makes efforts to support the city’s economic recovery through the alignment of staff and 
operations to support the long-term economic growth that will enable the city to resume restoring beloved and much 
needed city services and programming and address the growing list of deferred maintenance needed on our streets, 
parks, and city facilities.  
i
t also offers an array of cost saving measures and new revenue opportunities designed to 
strengthen the city’s financial resiliency in this moment.  Through these efforts, staff propose to realize a savings of 
about $2 million and new revenues from parking, partnerships, and events of $2.8 million.  These service and revenue 
changes are outlined in the Measure K Enhancements section of this budget.  


===== PAGE 7 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
2
THE NEXT FIVE YEARS
As relayed to Council in March 2025, the five-year forecast for the city reflects serious challenges, with limited growth 
in key revenue streams.  it also anticipates extremely high uncertainty about the health of the economy.  Since March, 
these concerns have only increased as discussions of tariffs and the breadth of the impacts of the federal government 
restructuring come to light.  
Once optimistic about economic recovery and a rebound in global tourism, hotels and businesses have revised their 
expectations to be more conservative and increase the probability of an economic recession.  
Due to the city’s historically low reserves, additional measures would be required to balance the budget if any one or 
combination of the following happen: the region’s economic downturn persists or worsens, the city must assume debt 
service payments to cover legal liabilities, or additional federal funding for public safety, transportation and affordable 
housing is no longer available. 
NEW TAX MEASURES
in 2024, Santa Monica voters overwhelmingly passed two new revenue measures – Measure F (business license tax 
modernization) and Measure K (parking facility tax in privately-operated parking facilities).  These new measures have 
proven critical to helping Santa Monica weather the current challenges facing the City and strategically fund new 
programming to promote public safety and safe streets.  
• Measure F was the first modernization of the City’s business license tax since 1990 and is estimated to generate 
up to $3 million annually in new revenues while enabling the city to more accurately and effectively apply the 
tax in the modern, digital economy.  The measure also lowered the effective tax rate for most businesses with 
revenues under $5 million to encourage investment in our local economy.
• Measure K raised the tax rate in private parking lots and structures to 18%, anticipated to generate $6.7 
million in new revenues annually.  Advisory Measure PSK was also approved by the voters advising that at 
least half of the measure’s revenues should be used for public safety.  A special section of this budget outlines 
proposed uses for the Measure K revenues to support both public safety and safe streets while also presenting 
corresponding service reductions, cost savings and new revenue opportunities designed to help balance the 
budget over the next biennial cycle.  
The faith of the Santa Monica voters to pass these new measures by wide margins is a testament to why i believe 
Santa Monica can successfully navigate these financial difficulties. Given prudent financial planning and collaboration 
with local community partners, and labor groups, we can continue to strengthen Santa Monica’s economy and address 
Council’s budget priorities.  


===== PAGE 8 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
3
GUIDED BY COUNCIL BUDGET PRIORITIES 
The FY 2025-2027 budget is focused on three priorities identified by Council at its March 8, 2025 budget workshop:
• Economic opportunity and growth
• Clean streets and safe neighborhoods
• Affordable, livable and secure housing for all
These priorities, of course, are not neatly siloed and are together designed to ensure the long-term wellbeing of the 
Santa Monica community, pushing to reimagine our economy and how we deliver services for how people live, work 
and play now and in the future.  
While how we live is changing thanks to technology, remote work, and other factors, Santa Monica values remain 
steadfast.  Underpinning all our work is a commitment to our core values of equity and sustainability.  As we work 
to reimagine our economy, create a greater sense of safety for all, and work to ensure housing for all, we do so 
understanding we must address past harms and build trust among many in our community as well as protect our 
beautiful community from the impacts of global warming, sea level rise and other human-driven impacts to our 
environment.  This is especially true as so many in our community are threatened by efforts in the federal government 
aimed at immigrant communities, LGBTQ+ individuals, and other vulnerable populations.  
With these priorities and values as guides, staff are recommending strategic shifts in resources and programming 
designed to advance these Council priorities even with the extremely limited funding available from the new tax 
measures.
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY AND GROWTH
Santa Monica’s economy, once a regional leader, remains impacted by shifting patterns in work, shopping, and 
tourism.  The vacancy rates of commercial buildings are much higher than historical rates, particularly in the downtown 
core.    Furthermore, trends to shop online continue to impact demand for traditional brick and mortar retail driving 
a need to think boldly about future opportunities for Santa Monica’s Promenade and Santa Monica Place.  Adding 
to these pressures are the anticipated downturn or flattening of international tourism as a result of the antagonistic 
policies put in place by the Trump administration and the potential substantial rise in cost of goods and services 
caused by tariffs and uncertain trade policies.  
 
in partnership with city’s valued partners, Santa Monica Travel and Tourism (SMTT), Downtown Santa Monica, inc, 
(DTSM) the Santa Monica Pier and the city’s business improvement districts, Santa Monica has a pivotal opportunity 
to reintroduce itself as a desirable place for investment and business.  As we celebrate the 150th anniversary of 
the founding of Santa Monica in FY 2025-2026, the city’s brand remains strong, with beautiful beaches, excellent 
restaurants, world-class hotels, and the iconic Pier and Promenade.  Global events such as the FiFA World Cup in 
2026, Superbowl LXi in 2027 and the LA28 Olympic and Paralympic Games all present major opportunities for Santa 


===== PAGE 9 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
4
Monica to welcome visitors and businesses from the region and the world.  it should be noted that while Santa 
Monica w
as disappointed not to be selected as  a host venue city for Olympic beach volleyball, the city is now able to 
explore exciting new event and branding opportunities and is expected to be an integral part of the regional Olympics 
experience.   
To build on this brand and leverage these opportunities, the Council has formed an ad hoc subcommittee to address 
Economic Recovery.  The City’s Community Development Department is leading an interdepartmental staff Task Force 
bringing staff across the city together to: 
•
Address v
acant or under-utilized real estate
• Promote Santa Monica to businesses and private investors
• Expand on Santa Monica’
s brand and market our business-friendly culture
• Modernize city codes to streamline permitting and expedite processes to open a business
, undertake tenant
improvements and/or to construct in Santa Monica
• Activ
ate public spaces so they are more attractive and welcoming to our residents and visitors, alike
• Build on public-priv
ate partnerships to activate the city’s beach and parks
To advance these goals, this budget includes the recommendations to: 
• Create a beach events program with designated 
“special event zones”
• Adopt entertainment zones on the Santa Monica promenade with greater flexibility on permits and sponsorship
to enable DTSM to fund this program
•
Fund the implementation of the new Land Use and Management System now underway
• Expand the city’
s out of home wayfinding digital kiosks
• Renew city efforts to ensure buildings are maintained,
 comply with city codes, and are safe
• Explore digital signage policy in downtown as a means of attracting more revenue to the city
• Extend the small business shop improvement grants program to assist more businesses across the city and help
attract investment to our commercial districts
, including potential support for activating vacant properties
• Launch an economic recovery grants program, leveraging support from LA County and other grant and funding
opportunities
•
Explore reductions to outdoor dining fees to help support local restaurants
• Look for immediate physical enhancements to the business corridors


===== PAGE 10 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
5
CLEAN STREETS AND SAFE NEIGHBORHOODS
 
Santa Monica takes a 360° approach to the issues of public safety, with resources dedicated to prevention, emergency 
response, prosecution, and diversion. it requires many elements to address concerns of safety in our community.  
Police, Fire, the Office of Emergency Management, and the City Attorney’s Office are  the backbone of these efforts, 
responding to emergencies and prosecuting or deferring offenders to rehabilitation programs.  Safety also requires 
collaboration from our Department of Transportation, which is responsible for ensuring Santa Monica’s roads and 
parking facilities are safe for all modes of mobility, collaborating with our Public Works teams to address lighting and 
maintenance issues,  the city Code Enforcement team to address concerns around vending and derelict buildings, and 
the Housing and Human Services Department to effectively engage our unhoused and vulnerable residents to connect 
them with housing and services.  
Santa Monica has been able to make considerable investments in public safety in recent years, thanks, in part, to 
Measure CS passed in 2022, which raised the transient occupancy tax in our hotels and home shares to fund services 
addressing safety and homelessness.  The city has invested in additional public safety positions, private services, and 
public safety technologies, including the drone program and the Santa Monica Analytical Real Time (SMART) Crime 
Center. The City also funded a dedicated Public Works Homeless Support Team (HoST) to address encampment-related 
waste and debris in our public spaces.  in February 2025, Council approved a Behavioral Health Strategy to guide 
development of local services, including a partnership between the city and the County of Los Angeles Department of 
Mental Health to continue operation of the Therapeutic Transport Team to address critical mental health needs. 
in addition to these investments, the Department of Transportation has worked to make the City’s roadways safer and 
better suited for pedestrians, bicyclists and scooter riders, transit buses, and drivers.  The city has expanded its bicycle 
network; made significant improvements to Wilshire Boulevard, Ocean Avenue, and 17th Street; reduced speed limits 
on 33 miles of roadways across the City including Olympic, Lincoln, Pico, and Ocean Park boulevards, Neilson Way, and 
many local streets; upgraded dozens of intersections to all-way stops while enhancing traffic safety coordination with 
SMPD and renewing the popular “Take the Friendly Road” safety awareness campaign; and enhanced safety measures 
on the Big Blue Bus.  
To continue to advance this work, this budget includes several proposals to address public safety and transportation 
needs.  Departments have put forth proposals reflective of our 360°approach to public safety, including:
• Expanding the Police Department drone program, 
• Adding traffic enforcement officers to improve traffic safety, including commercial traffic safety,
• Piloting a city run ambulance operator program, 
• Addressing the need for replacement of copper wire to repair and maintain City streetlights.  
Likewise, there are proposals that will further the City’s efforts to ensure safety for all modes of movement on City 
streets, including:
• increased funding for both neighborhood traffic calming and transformational projects along major corridors to 
address safety issues at critical areas across the city


===== PAGE 11 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
6
• Resuming ”Safe Routes to School” and “Safe Routes for Seniors” programming to increase safety 
education and outreach for vulnerable road users
• Reconfiguring the Z-gates on the Expo Bike Path and implementing “no right on red” restrictions at 
scramble crosswalks in the Downtown district
• Adding license plate reading technologies in city parking structures
• Funding traffic and mobility staff needed to advance these projects
AFFORDABLE, LIVABLE AND SECURE HOUSING FOR ALL
 
Santa Monica is a known innovator in the delivery of comprehensive, coordinated, and interdisciplinary approaches 
to addressing and preventing homelessness, including the development of affordable housing.  Santa Monica is 
one of the few cities designated as a pro-housing city by the State following the adoption of the city’s housing 
element.  This is reflective of the multi-departmental approach including Housing and Human Services, Police, 
Fire, Community Development, City Attorney’s Office, City Manager’s Office, Public Works and the Department of 
Transportation.  
To continue to advance the city’s efforts in these areas, Council adopted the 2025-30 Homelessness Strategic Plan 
in March 2025 and funded several new programs designed to provide rental protection and financial assistance 
and expand access to legal counsel to help residents remain in their homes.  in addition to these advancements, 
Council also approved the reorganization of the Housing and Human Services Department to create a 
Homelessness Prevention and intervention division and the addition of new staff positions to focus the city’s work 
in these areas.  These enhancements were made possible by the 2022 approved tax Measure GS, which dedicates 
funding for homelessness prevention and affordable housing by raising the document transfer tax on all properties 
over $8 million. 
 
Staff propose continuing the funding for these programs and services, including:
• Advancing the development of affordable housing on city-owned sites
• Sustaining the expanded Preserving our Diversity (POD) program
• Staff to better help coordinate and navigate services
• Continuing funding the Human Services Grants Program (HSGP)
• Expanding the Homeless Liaison Program (HLP) team


===== PAGE 12 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
7
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS AND PERFORMANCE METRICS
T
o help communicate how the budget is programmed into department projects and services, the FY 2025-2027 
budget includes the departmental workplans for the first time.  With almost 300 separate projects across the 12 
departments that report to the City Manager, these workplans capture the major initiatives and services planned 
for the upcoming year, including efforts from departmental or subject-specific strategic plans, capital projects, 
projects supporting Council priorities, projects incorporated from Council direction (often referred to as 16 items) 
and projects critical to the safe, secure and modern delivery of city services.  
The departmental workplans capture much of the city’s project- based work while the budget performance metrics 
provide an insight into the level of day-to-day services provided, such as Big Blue Bus ridership, permits applied 
for, housing vouchers issued, and 311 and 911 requests.  Together the workplans and budget metrics provide a 
comprehensive, if not complete, picture of the breadth of work provided by the city every day.  These elements also 
provide the building blocks as the city explores opportunities to create more transparency and accountability of 
city operations through performance budgeting.  
A POSITIVE LONG-TERM OUTLOOK 
T
he next two years will undoubtedly test the city’s financial resiliency. The economic pressures mentioned above 
require us to curtail growth in city services and take measures to reduce operating costs.  But it also builds on the 
strengths of Santa Monica, continuing to provide a wide range of programs and services for our community and 
realigning resources to support our economic development.
Santa Monica’s long-term future remains positive.  There is over $1 billion in investment in our local hotels and 
7,721 units of new housing pending, approved or under construction.  The business license modernization and 
permitting process improvements help the city onboard new businesses.  And they are opening on the Promenade, 
Santa Monica Place, and across the city.  
The new Pier Bridge project will begin at the end of 2025 and will ensure the long-term safety and viability of 
our historic Pier.  And, we are well underway in our community efforts to reimagine the Santa Monica Airport. We 
also have been able to welcome several schools and businesses displaced by the Palisades Fire to Santa Monica 
through collaborative and dedicated staff work.  
This budget builds on that spirit of collaboration and dedication to explore activating our downtown, beach and 
Pier through more events, partnerships, and the creation of entertainment zones.  With leadership and vision 
set by the City Council, this budget sets our community on the path for long-term growth and the opportunities 
presented by major events slated in the coming years, culminating with the Olympics in 2028. 


===== PAGE 13 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
8
FISCAL CONTEXT
Expenditur
es 
The overall proposed budget for the City of Santa Monica is $789.9 million in FY 2025-26 and $825.5 million in FY 
2026-27, net of reimbursements and transfers between city funds.  This reflects the operating and capital activities 
of 31 funds across 15 departments and approximately 2,135 permanent and temporary full-time equivalent (FTE) 
positions. 
The largest component of the budget is in the General Fund, which is funded predominantly with tax revenues and 
provides services shared equally by all community members and visitors.  The General Fund budget is $480.9 million in 
FY 2025-26 and $495.8 million in FY 2026-27. 
The Citywide budget also includes several enterprise and special revenue funds – funds that are for specific uses or 
based on use of resources by individuals.     
•
Among the larger funds contributing to the City’
s operations, the Water, Wastewater, Big Blue Bus (BBB), Airport,
Resource Recovery and Recycling (RRR) and Cemetery Funds have sufficient revenue to cover operational and
capital needs during the biennial period.
•
T
he Pier and Beach Recreation Funds are projected to require subsidies and advances during the biennial
budget period, totaling approximately $7.0 million. Continued revenue constraints, including the closure of the
Pier Deck parking due to operational concerns and pending plans to adjust beach parking rates, are significantly
contributing to the situation. Staff are currently in the process of conducting a citywide parking study, including
conducting a parking supply and demand analysis, with recommendations expected back in late-2025 to inform
potential parking rate changes that would be brought to the City Council and submitted to the California
Coastal Commission in 2025.
•
T
he 
i
nformation Technology and vehicle Management Funds are awaiting repayment of contributions from
the General Fund, which were temporarily suspended to help address the immediate challenges posed by the
pandemic.
 As a result, these internal service funds had to restrict or postpone the replacement of equipment
and vehicles, prioritizing only the most critical needs.
• T
he Housing Trust Fund is also awaiting repayment of funds borrowed by the General Fund, which were utilized
to mitigate the effects of the pandemic and address legal claims.
The City’s two-year budget approach means that FY 2025-26 represents the exception-based year for our capital 
improvement program (C
i
P) Biennial Budget.  The C
i
P budget for FY 2025-26 is $108.5 million, with $15.2 million 
representing the General Fund portion.  Prior to the pandemic, the General Fund allocation to the C
i
P was $21 million 
a year.  This amount was reduced to $7.8 million in FY 2020-21 and has increased gradually since then. However, 
the funding reduction has resulted in deferred equipment and infrastructure maintenance, leading to higher repair 
and/or replacement costs, increased need for emergency repairs to address system failures and reduced efficiency to 
operations.  The current General Fund allocations to the C
i
P are insufficient to tackle the growing backlog of deferred 


===== PAGE 14 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
9
maintenance or to fund new investments in community amenities, which remain on hold due to the financial strain 
caused by the pandemic. At this time, a total of $456.6 million in projects remain unfunded and are tracked for 
consideration in future funding cycles.  Over 95.6% ($436.5 million) of the unfunded list is comprised of requests for 
General Fund resources with the additional 4.4% ($20.1 million) comprised of infrastructure requests for Pier Fund 
resources.  
Revenues
The citywide proposed revenue budget is $810.2 million in FY 2025-26 and $854.9 million in FY 2026-27, net of 
reimbursements and transfers between city funds.  
The largest component of the budget is in the General Fund, which is funded predominantly with tax revenues.  The 
General Fund budget is $470.4 million in FY 2025-26 and $488.4 million in FY 2026-27.  
Santa Monica's diverse tax base has historically provided financial stability, but the city faces ongoing challenges 
due to its reliance on retail, tourism, and hospitality—sectors hit hard by the pandemic and continue to struggle to 
recover. While visitor activity is recovering, it remains slow, and remote work trends have reduced daytime population 
to 60% of 2019 levels. These shifts impact consumer spending, sales tax revenues, and contribute to higher retail and 
corporate vacancy rates compared to regional averages.  These factors are impacting revenues in the General Fund.
Transient Occupancy Tax revenue, a key contributor to the General Fund, is recovering more slowly than expected 
despite Measure CS increasing the tax rates in 2023. The LA wildfires and geopolitics have resulted in a slower 
rebound in tourism, projected to reach 2019 levels only by late 2026 or early 2027. Not since the pandemic has the 
travel industry faced this level of uncertainty. From the difficulty of forecasting future trends to alarming dips across 
sectors and global headlines casting doubt on travel to the U.S., the industry is at a precarious point, and this has 
dampened revenue growth in this area.
Sales tax collections have also been impacted by reduced consumer spending in retail and other areas, particularly 
in luxury and electric vehicle sectors.  Factors like a 29% rise in car prices since the pandemic, higher financing costs, 
increased interest rates, and insurance premiums have driven these shifts. Restaurants, especially in the fine dining 
sector, are experiencing declines as consumers opt for more budget-friendly options.
Parking-related revenues, another major resource stream, show modest annual growth of 1.75%. However, pandemic-
driven changes like increased online shopping, remote work, and alternative transportation methods (e.g., rideshare, 
public transit, bicycles, and scooters) are expected to limit future demand for parking. Policies such as free downtown 
parking for the first 90 minutes further influence these trends. 
Together, these revenue streams—transient occupancy tax, sales taxes, and parking-related revenues (including 
Parking Facility Taxes), make up a significant 45.4% of the General Fund revenues. The challenges in these areas 
directly affect the City’s capacity to fund essential services, implement new projects, and respond to evolving 
community needs. Addressing these revenue trends is vital for ensuring long-term fiscal stability and maintaining the 
ability to invest in key services.


===== PAGE 15 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
10
FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY 
T
he Budget is informed by, and informs, the Five-Year Financial Forecast. 
i
n order to include an ongoing program or 
service in the Budget, there must be an ability to fund this expense over the long-term using ongoing revenues, while 
limiting the use of assigned or restricted reserves, or working capital reserves.  The General Fund Forecast indicates 
that expenditures will exceed revenues on an annual basis during the budget period. To balance the budget requires 
the use of approximately $49 million in reserves over FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27, considering that labor negotiations 
are in progress and the fiscal impact has not been finalized yet.  
Staff recommend the use of these reserves to prevent further service and staffing impacts.  The City is committed 
to economic development and our ability to maintain clean and safe spaces, maintain roads and sidewalks, enforce 
building codes, process permits and business licenses, and host events all support these efforts.
As of June 30, 2024, General Fund non-restricted reserves amounted to 61% of what they were as of June 30, 
2019.  Strong reserves are necessary to cushion the delivery of
 
services from the impact of emergency expenditures, 
contingent liabilities, and economic uncertainty. Since 2020, demands on these reserves have been compounded by: 
• Severe loss of revenues as a result of the pandemic (estimated at $195 million through June 30,
 2024, as
compared to pre-pandemic projections).
• Delivery of essential services during the COvi
D-19 Pandemic.
• P
ayments of over $229.8 million in legal settlements over the past three years related to
 allegations of sexual
abuse by a former employee
.
Looking ahead,
 the City is facing another 170 claims in the matter related to
 
allegations of sexual abuse by a former 
employee, as well as 4 claims against another former employee in another matter.  The City filed its own lawsuit 
seeking reimbursement from its insurers for claims paid and to be paid in the Uller matters, but the amount of 
reimbursement is uncertain, and no reimbursement is anticipated for at least two years.  Likewise, the California 
voting 
Rights 
Act or C
v
RA case was recently heard by the California Supreme Court, which issued an opinion referring the 
case back to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal transferred the case back to the trial court. The case may go to 
trial in late 2025.
The Capital 
i
mprovement Program also remains underfunded with a growing backlog of deferred maintenance, budget 
estimates for funded projects are put at risk with potential cost increases due to tariffs, and uncertainty around federal 
funding.  Finally, this budget must also take into consideration successor labor agreements for all 11 bargaining units 
that must carefully balance the needs of the workforce with the financial uncertainty of the immediate future.  


===== PAGE 16 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
11
The City faces a challenging path ahead as it grapples with the need to secure its financial future, restore much needed 
City services and programming, address the growing list of deferred maintenance needed on our streets, parks, and 
City facilities, and build stability for years to come. Though the FY 2025-27 General Fund budget necessitates drawing 
approximately $49 million from its reserves, the City is taking key steps to chart a path forward by: 
•
Setting aside a Rainy Day Fund reserve, totaling 14% of ongoing expenditures by the end of FY 2024-25.
• Preserving City services and programs while limiting departmental growth and implementing cost-saving
measures to address the operational deficit effectively.
•
Achieving strong voter support in 2024 for two vital revenue measures: Measure F , which modernizes the
business license tax for the first time since 1990,
 generating $3 million annually, while and among other things,
lowering tax rates for most businesses earning under $5 million. Measure K raised taxes on private parking
facilities, anticipated to raise $6.7 million, with at least half earmarked for public safety.
Together, these efforts provide much needed essential resources to tackle challenges, fund vital programs, all while 
fostering a resilient local economy through thoughtful planning and collaboration. The City’s proactive approach 
reflects its commitment to a strong, vibrant future.
Respectfully submitted, 
Elaine Polachek
Interim City Manager


===== PAGE 17 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
12
UN ENTORNO DESAFIANTE
Al inicio del periodo presupuestario bienal del año fiscal 2025-2027, la ciudad de Santa Monica se enfrenta a muchas 
presiones financieras. La ciudad tiene dos órdenes de emergencia en curso: una para apoyar la respuesta a los 
devastadores incendios forestales de enero de 2025, y otra para hacer frente a la emergencia regional de las personas 
sin hogar. Además de estas órdenes, la ciudad sigue enfrentándose a responsabilidades legales sin precedentes y a una 
incertidumbre extrema derivada de los cambios en las políticas del gobierno federal que generan un impacto en el 
financiamiento de los servicios municipales y locales sin fines de lucro, el turismo, y la economía y la inflación en 
general. 
Vemos y oímos las repercusiones de estas presiones en nuestros vecinos regionales y en el Estado, que tienen que 
tomar decisiones presupuestarias difíciles. Santa Monica no es la excepción. 
Estas presiones, junto con la persistente recesión económica derivada de la pandemia de COVID-19, están afectando 
las principales fuentes de ingresos, como el impuesto sobre las ventas, el impuesto de ocupación transitoria y los 
ingresos por estacionamiento, que han disminuido o se mantienen estables. La ciudad también sigue enfrentándose a 
responsabilidades legales sin precedentes en un momento en el que opera con unas reservas financieras 
extremadamente bajas como consecuencia de los acuerdos alcanzados en los casos de abuso sexual de un antiguo 
empleado y la continuación del litigio del caso de la Enmienda de los Derechos de los Votantes de California. El 
resultado es que la ciudad tendrá un déficit operativo durante los próximos cinco años, lo que obligará a usar $60.5 
millones de las reservas para equilibrar el presupuesto. 
Por lo tanto, el presupuesto para el año fiscal 2025-2027 se centra en la capacidad de resiliencia para soportar las 
consecuencias económicas de los incendios, y para la incertidumbre económica prevista para los próximos años. El 
presupuesto mantiene los servicios y programas de la ciudad, pero limita el crecimiento en todos los departamentos e 
implementa otras medidas de ahorro para mitigar el impacto del déficit operativo. El programa de mejoras de capital 
también sigue sin fondos suficientes, y las estimaciones presupuestarias de los proyectos financiados corren peligro por 
los posibles aumentos de costos debidos a los aranceles, la incertidumbre en torno al financiamiento federal y otros 
factores. Por último, este presupuesto también debe tener en cuenta los acuerdos laborales sucesores para las 11 
unidades de negociación que deben equilibrar cuidadosamente las necesidades del personal con la incertidumbre 
financiera del futuro inmediato.
El presupuesto del año fiscal 2023-2025 financió el mayor restablecimiento de los programas y servicios de la ciudad 
luego de la pandemia de 2020. La ciudad logró restablecer parcialmente los programas para jóvenes y adultos 
mayores, ampliar el horario de atención al público para los trámites de permisos, reanudar los servicios en persona en 
la ventanilla de servicios de vivienda, reabrir las sucursales de la biblioteca y ampliar su horario, invertir en un nuevo 
sistema de administración de permisos y uso del suelo, añadir seguridad a las estructuras de estacionamiento del 
centro, restablecer los guardias de cruce en las escuelas, así como restablecer parte del personal y los suministros para 
el mantenimiento de nuestros parques e instalaciones públicas. En este momento, la continuación de estos trabajos de 
ampliación debe interrumpirse. 
En cambio, el presupuesto propuesto se centra en apoyar la recuperación económica de la ciudad a través de la 
alineación del personal y las operaciones, para apoyar el crecimiento económico a largo plazo que le permitirá a la 
ciudad reanudar la restauración de los servicios y la programación tan necesarios en la ciudad, y hacer frente a la 
creciente lista de mantenimiento diferido necesario en las calles, parques e instalaciones de la ciudad. También ofrece 
una serie de medidas de ahorro y nuevas oportunidades de ingresos destinadas a reforzar la resiliencia financiera de la 
ciudad en este momento. A través de esta iniciativa, el personal propone conseguir un ahorro de unos $2 millones y 
nuevos ingresos por estacionamiento, asociaciones y eventos por valor de $2.8 millones. Estos cambios en los servicios 
e ingresos se describen en la sección Acrecentamientos de la Medida K de este presupuesto. 

===== PAGE 18 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
13
LOS PRÓXIMOS CINCO AÑOS
Tal y como se comunicó al Consejo en marzo de 2025, la proyección para la ciudad a cinco años refleja serios desafíos, 
con un crecimiento limitado de las principales fuentes de ingresos. También se prevé una incertidumbre 
extremadamente alta sobre la salud de la economía. Desde marzo, estas preocupaciones no han hecho más que 
aumentar a medida que salen a la luz los debates sobre los aranceles y la amplitud de las repercusiones de la 
reestructuración del gobierno federal. 
Los hoteles y las empresas, antes optimistas sobre la recuperación económica y el repunte del turismo mundial, han 
revisado sus expectativas para ser más conservadores y aumentar la probabilidad de una recesión económica. 
Debido a las reservas históricamente bajas de la ciudad, se requerirían medidas adicionales para equilibrar el 
presupuesto si se diera alguna de las siguientes circunstancias o una combinación de ellas: la recesión económica de la 
región persiste o empeora, la ciudad debe asumir pagos del servicio de la deuda para cubrir responsabilidades legales, 
o ya no se dispone de financiamiento federal adicional para seguridad pública, transporte y vivienda asequible.
• La Medida F fue la primera modernización del impuesto sobre licencias comerciales de la ciudad desde 1990, y se
calcula que generará hasta $3 millones anuales en nuevos ingresos, al tiempo que permitirá a la ciudad aplicar el
impuesto con mayor precisión y eficacia en la economía moderna y digital. La medida también redujo la tasa de
impuesto efectiva para la mayoría de las empresas con ingresos inferiores a $5 millones para fomentar la
inversión en nuestra economía local.
• La Medida K elevó la tasa de impuesto en estacionamientos y estructuras privadas al 18%, con lo que se prevé
generar $6.7 millones anuales en nuevos ingresos. La Medida Consultiva PSK también fue aprobada por los
votantes, aconsejando que al menos la mitad de los ingresos de la medida se destinaran a la seguridad pública.
Una sección especial de este presupuesto describe los usos propuestos para los ingresos de la Medida K para
apoyar tanto la seguridad pública como las calles seguras, a la vez que presenta las correspondientes reducciones
de servicios, ahorros de costos y nuevas oportunidades de ingresos diseñados para ayudar a equilibrar el
presupuesto durante el próximo ciclo bienal.
NUEVAS MEDIDAS TRIBUTARIAS
En 2024, los votantes de Santa Mónica aprobaron por una abrumadora mayoría dos nuevas medidas de ingresos: la 
Medida F (modernización del impuesto sobre licencias comerciales) y la Medida K (impuesto sobre instalaciones de 
estacionamiento en estacionamientos de gestión privada). Estas nuevas medidas han demostrado ser fundamentales 
para ayudar a Santa Mónica a superar los desafíos actuales a los que se enfrenta la ciudad y financiar estratégicamente 
nuevos programas para promover la seguridad pública y calles seguras. 
La fe de los votantes de Santa Mónica para aprobar estas nuevas medidas por amplios márgenes es un testimonio de 
por qué creo que Santa Mónica puede sortear con éxito estas dificultades financieras. Con una planificación financiera 
prudente y la colaboración con los socios de la comunidad local y los grupos laborales, podemos seguir fortaleciendo la 
economía de Santa Mónica y abordar las prioridades presupuestarias del Consejo. 

===== PAGE 19 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
14
GUIADOS POR LAS PRIORIDADES PRESUPUESTARIAS DEL CONSEJO 
El presupuesto del año fiscal 2025-2027 se centra en tres prioridades identificadas por el Consejo en su taller 
presupuestario del 8 de marzo de 2025:
• Oportunidades económicas y crecimiento
• Calles limpias y barrios seguros
• Viviendas asequibles, habitables y seguras para todos
Estas prioridades, por supuesto, no están aisladas y, en conjunto, están diseñadas para garantizar el bienestar a largo 
plazo de la comunidad de Santa Mónica, empujando a reimaginar nuestra economía y la forma en la que prestamos 
servicios para que la gente viva, trabaje y juegue ahora y en el futuro. 
Aunque nuestra forma de vida está cambiando gracias a la tecnología, el trabajo a distancia y otros factores, los 
valores de Santa Mónica se mantienen firmes. Todo nuestro trabajo se basa en el compromiso con nuestros valores 
fundamentales de equidad y sostenibilidad. Cuando trabajamos para reimaginar nuestra economía, crear una mayor 
sensación de seguridad para todos y garantizar viviendas para todos, lo hacemos entendiendo que debemos abordar 
los daños del pasado y fomentar la confianza entre muchas personas en nuestra comunidad, así como proteger nuestra 
hermosa comunidad de los impactos del calentamiento global, el aumento del nivel del mar y otros impactos 
provocados por el hombre en nuestro medio ambiente. Esto es especialmente cierto para muchos miembros de nuestra 
comunidad que se ven amenazados por los esfuerzos del gobierno federal dirigidos contra las comunidades 
inmigrantes, las personas LGBTQ+ y otras poblaciones vulnerables. 
Con estas prioridades y valores como guía, el personal recomienda cambios estratégicos en los recursos y la 
programación diseñados para avanzar en estas prioridades del Consejo, incluso con el financiamiento extremadamente 
limitado disponible de las nuevas medidas tributarias.
OPORTUNIDADES ECONÓMICAS Y CRECIMIENTO 
La economía de Santa Mónica, en otro época líder regional, sigue viéndose afectada por los cambios en las tendencias 
del trabajo, las compras y el turismo. Las tasas de desocupación de los edificios comerciales son muy superiores a las 
históricas, sobre todo en el centro de la ciudad. Además, la tendencia a comprar en línea sigue afectando la demanda 
de comercios tradicionales, lo que obliga a pensar creativamente en las oportunidades a futuro para el paseo marítimo 
de Santa Mónica y Santa Monica Place. A estas presiones se suman el descenso o aplanamiento previsto del turismo 
internacional como resultado de las políticas antagónicas puestas en marcha por la administración Trump y el posible 
aumento sustancial del costo de los bienes y servicios causado por los aranceles y las políticas comerciales inciertas. 
En colaboración con los valiosos socios de la ciudad, Santa Monica Travel and Tourism (SMTT), Downtown Santa 
Monica, Inc. (DTSM), el Muelle de Santa Mónica y los distritos de mejora empresarial de la ciudad, Santa Mónica tiene 
una oportunidad crucial de volver a presentarse como un lugar deseable para la inversión y los negocios. Mientras 
celebramos el 150 aniversario de la fundación de Santa Mónica en el año fiscal 2025-2026, la marca de la ciudad sigue 
siendo fuerte, con playas hermosas, restaurantes excelentes, hoteles de primera categoría, y el icónico muelle y paseo 
marítimo. Acontecimientos mundiales como la Copa Mundial de la FIFA en 2026, el Superbowl LXI en 2027 y los 
Juegos Olímpicos y los Juegos Olímpicos y Paralímpicos de Los Ángeles 2028 suponen oportunidades importantes para 
que Santa Mónica reciba a visitantes y empresas de la región y del mundo. Cabe destacar que, aunque Santa Mónica se 
sintió decepcionada por no haber sido seleccionada como ciudad anfitriona de los Juegos Olímpicos de vóleibol de 
playa, la ciudad ahora está en condiciones de explorar oportunidades de eventos y de desarrollo de marca nuevas e 
interesantes, y se espera que sea parte esencial de la experiencia olímpica regional. 

===== PAGE 20 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
15
Para aprovechar esta marca y sacar partido de estas oportunidades, el Consejo ha creado un subcomité ad hoc para 
abordar la Recuperación Económica. El Departamento de Desarrollo Comunitario de la ciudad dirige un grupo 
operativo interdepartamental que reúne al personal de toda la ciudad para: 
• Ocuparse de los inmuebles vacíos o subutilizados
• Promocionar Santa Mónica entre empresas e inversores privados
• Ampliar la marca de Santa Mónica y promocionar nuestra cultura favorable para los negocios
• Modernizar los códigos de la ciudad para agilizar la concesión de permisos y acelerar los procesos de apertura
de un negocio, hacer mejoras para los inquilinos y/o para construir en Santa Mónica
• Activar los espacios públicos para que sean más atractivos y acogedores tanto para nuestros residentes como
para los visitantes
• Aprovechar las asociaciones público-privadas para activar la playa y los parques de la ciudad
Para avanzar en estos objetivos, este presupuesto incluye las recomendaciones de: 
• Crear un programa de eventos en la playa con "zonas de eventos especiales" designadas
• Adoptar zonas de entretenimiento en el paseo marítimo de Santa Mónica con mayor flexibilidad en materia de
permisos y patrocinio para que DTSM pueda financiar este programa
• Financiar la implementación del nuevo Sistema de Administración y Uso del Suelo, actualmente en curso
• Ampliar los kioscos digitales de orientación fuera del hogar de la ciudad
• Renovar los esfuerzos de la ciudad para garantizar que los edificios se mantienen, cumplen los códigos de la
ciudad y son seguros
• Explorar una política de señalización digital para el centro de la ciudad como medio de atraer más ingresos a
la ciudad
• Ampliar el programa de subvenciones para la mejora de pequeños comercios para ayudar a más comercios de
toda la ciudad y contribuir a atraer inversiones a nuestros distritos comerciales, incluyendo posible apoyo para
activar propiedades vacías
• Lanzar un programa de subvenciones para la recuperación económica, aprovechando el apoyo del condado de
Los Ángeles y otras oportunidades de subvención y financiamiento
• Estudiar reducciones de las tasas por comer al aire libre para ayudar a los restaurantes locales
• Buscar mejoras físicas inmediatas en los corredores comerciales

===== PAGE 21 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
16
CALLES LIMPIAS Y BARRIOS SEGUROS
Santa Mónica adopta un enfoque de 360° en materia de seguridad pública, con recursos dedicados a la prevención, la 
respuesta a emergencias, la persecución y la remisión. Requiere muchos elementos para abordar los problemas de 
seguridad de nuestra comunidad. La Policía, los Bomberos, la Oficina de Administración de Emergencias y la Oficina 
del Fiscal de la Ciudad son la columna vertebral de estos esfuerzos, ya que se encargan de responder a las 
emergencias y procesan o derivan a los infractores a programas de rehabilitación. La seguridad también requiere la 
colaboración de nuestro Departamento de Transporte, que es responsable de garantizar que las calles y 
estacionamientos de Santa Mónica sean seguros para todos los modos de movilidad, colaborando con nuestros 
equipos de Obras Públicas para abordar los problemas de iluminación y mantenimiento, el equipo de Aplicación del 
Código de la ciudad para abordar las preocupaciones en torno a la venta ambulante y los edificios abandonados, y el 
Departamento de Vivienda y Servicios Humanos para involucrar eficazmente a nuestros residentes sin vivienda y 
vulnerables para conectarlos con la vivienda y los servicios. 
Santa Mónica ha podido realizar inversiones considerables en seguridad pública en los últimos años, gracias, en parte, 
a la Medida CS aprobada en 2022, que elevó el impuesto de ocupación transitoria en nuestros hoteles y casas 
compartidas para financiar servicios que abordan la seguridad y la falta de vivienda. La ciudad ha invertido en más 
puestos de seguridad pública, servicios privados y tecnologías de seguridad pública, incluido el programa de drones y 
el Centro Analítico de la Delincuencia en Tiempo Real de Santa Mónica (SMART). La ciudad también financió un 
Equipo de Apoyo a las Personas sin Hogar (HoST) de Obras Públicas para que se ocupara de los residuos y escombros 
relacionados con los campamentos en nuestros espacios públicos. En febrero de 2025, el Consejo aprobó una 
Estrategia de Salud Conductual para guiar el desarrollo de los servicios locales, incluida una asociación entre la ciudad 
y el Departamento de Salud Mental del Condado de Los Ángeles para continuar con el funcionamiento del Equipo de 
Transporte Terapéutico para abordar las necesidades críticas de salud mental. 
Además de estas inversiones, el Departamento de Transporte ha trabajado para que las calles de la ciudad sean más 
seguras y estén mejor adaptadas a peatones, ciclistas y usuarios de monopatines, autobuses de transporte público y 
conductores. La ciudad ha ampliado su red para bicicletas; ha realizado mejoras significativas en Wilshire Boulevard, 
Ocean Avenue y 17th Street; ha reducido los límites de velocidad a 33 millas en las carreteras de toda la ciudad, 
incluidos los bulevares Olympic, Lincoln, Pico y Ocean Park, Neilson Way y muchas calles locales; ha mejorado 
docenas de intersecciones para convertirlas en paradas en todos los sentidos, al tiempo que ha mejorado la 
coordinación de la seguridad del tráfico con SMPD y ha renovado la popular campaña de concientización sobre 
seguridad "Take the Friendly Road"; y ha mejorado las medidas de seguridad en el Big Blue Bus. 
Para seguir avanzando en esta tarea, este presupuesto incluye varias propuestas para hacer frente a las necesidades 
de seguridad pública y transporte. Los departamentos han presentado propuestas que reflejan nuestro planteamiento 
de 360° de la seguridad pública, entre ellas:
• Ampliar el programa de drones del Departamento de Policía,
• Añadir agentes de tráfico para mejorar la seguridad vial, incluida la seguridad del tráfico comercial,
• Hacer una prueba piloto de un programa de operador de ambulancias gestionado por la ciudad,
• Abordar la necesidad de sustituir los cables de cobre para reparar y mantener las farolas de la ciudad.
Del mismo modo, hay propuestas que impulsarán los esfuerzos de la ciudad para garantizar la seguridad de todos los 
modos de circulación en las calles de la ciudad, incluyendo:
• Aumento del financiamiento tanto para apaciguar el tráfico en los barrios como para proyectos de
transformación a lo largo de los principales corredores, a fin de resolver los problemas de seguridad en zonas
críticas de toda la ciudad

===== PAGE 22 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
17
• Reanudación de los programas "Safe Routes to School" y "Safe Routes for Seniors" para aumentar la educación
y la divulgación en materia de seguridad para los usuarios vulnerables de la vía pública
• Reconfiguración de las puertas Z en la senda Expo Bike Path y aplicación de restricciones de "no girar a la
derecha en rojo" en los pasos de peatones en el distrito del centro de la ciudad
• Incorporación de tecnologías de lectura de matrículas en los estacionamientos de la ciudad
• Financiamiento del personal de tráfico y movilidad necesario para impulsar estos proyectos
VIVIENDAS ASEQUIBLES, HABITABLES Y SEGURAS PARA TODOS 
Santa Mónica es una ciudad innovadora conocida por la aplicación de enfoques integrales, coordinados e 
interdisciplinarios para abordar y prevenir el problema de las personas sin hogar, incluido el desarrollo de viviendas 
asequibles. Santa Mónica es una de las pocas ciudades designadas como ciudad pro vivienda por el Estado luego de la 
adopción del elemento vivienda de la ciudad. Esto refleja el enfoque multidepartamental, que incluye a Vivienda y 
Servicios Humanos, la Policía, los Bomberos, Desarrollo Comunitario, la Oficina del Fiscal de la Ciudad, la Oficina del 
Administrador de la Ciudad, Obras Públicas y el Departamento de Transporte. 
Para seguir avanzando en las iniciativas de la ciudad en estas áreas, el Consejo adoptó en marzo de 2025 el Plan 
Estratégico 2025-30 para Personas sin Hogar y financió varios programas nuevos diseñados para proporcionar 
protección de alquiler y asistencia financiera y ampliar el acceso a asesoramiento legal para ayudar a los residentes a 
permanecer en sus hogares. Además de estos avances, el Consejo también aprobó la reorganización del Departamento 
de Vivienda y Servicios Humanos para crear una división de Prevención e Intervención de la Falta de Techo y la 
incorporación de nuevos puestos de personal para centrar el trabajo de la ciudad en estas áreas. Estas mejoras fueron 
posibles gracias al impuesto aprobado en 2022 Medida GS, que dedica fondos para la prevención de la falta de vivienda 
y la vivienda asequible mediante el aumento del impuesto de transferencia de documentos en todas las propiedades de 
más de $8 millones. 
El personal propone mantener el financiamiento de estos programas y servicios, entre los que se incluyen:
• Fomento de la construcción de viviendas asequibles en terrenos de propiedad de la ciudad
• Mantenimiento del programa ampliado "Preserving our Diversity" (POD)
• Personal que ayude a coordinar y brindar orientación para los servicios
• Seguir financiando el Programa de Subvenciones para Servicios Humanos (HSGP)
• Ampliación del equipo del Programa de Enlace para Personas sin Hogar (HLP)

===== PAGE 23 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
18
PLANES DE TRABAJO E INDICADORES DE DESEMPEÑO DE LOS DEPARTAMENTOS
Para ayudar a comunicar cómo se programa el presupuesto en los proyectos y servicios de los departamentos, el 
presupuesto del año fiscal 2025-2027 incluye por primera vez los planes de trabajo de los departamentos. Con casi 300 
proyectos distintos en los 12 departamentos que dependen del administrador de la ciudad, estos planes de trabajo 
recogen las principales iniciativas y servicios previstos para el próximo año, incluidos los esfuerzos de los planes 
estratégicos departamentales o específicos de cada materia, los proyectos de capital, los proyectos de apoyo a las 
prioridades del Consejo, los proyectos incorporados a partir de la dirección del Consejo (a menudo denominados 16 
puntos) y los proyectos críticos para la prestación segura y moderna de los servicios de la ciudad. 
Los planes de trabajo departamentales recogen gran parte del trabajo de la ciudad basado en proyectos, mientras que 
las métricas de rendimiento presupuestario ofrecen una visión del nivel de los servicios cotidianos prestados, como el 
número de usuarios del Big Blue Bus, los permisos solicitados, los vales de vivienda emitidos y las solicitudes al 311 y al 
911. Juntos, los planes de trabajo y las métricas presupuestarias ofrecen una imagen exhaustiva, aunque no completa,
de la amplitud del trabajo que realiza la ciudad cada día. Estos elementos también proporcionan las bases para que la
ciudad explore oportunidades para crear más transparencia y responsabilidad en las operaciones de la ciudad a través
de la presupuestación por resultados.
PERSPECTIVAS POSITIVAS A LARGO PLAZO 
Sin duda, los dos próximos años pondrán a prueba la resiliencia financiera de la ciudad. Las presiones económicas 
mencionadas nos obligan a frenar el crecimiento de los servicios de la ciudad y a tomar medidas para reducir los costos 
operativos. Pero también se basa en los puntos fuertes de Santa Mónica, continuando con una amplia gama de 
programas y servicios para nuestra comunidad y reajustando los recursos para apoyar nuestro desarrollo económico.
El futuro a largo plazo de Santa Mónica sigue siendo positivo. Hay más de $1,000 millones de inversión en nuestros 
hoteles locales y 7,721 unidades de viviendas nuevas pendientes, aprobadas o en construcción. La modernización de las 
licencias comerciales y la mejora del proceso de concesión de permisos ayudan a la ciudad a incorporar nuevas 
empresas. Y están abriendo en el paseo marítimo, en Santa Monica Place y por toda la ciudad. 
El proyecto del nuevo puente del muelle comenzará a finales de 2025 y garantizará la seguridad y viabilidad a largo 
plazo de nuestro muelle histórico. Y, estamos muy avanzados en nuestros esfuerzos comunitarios para reimaginar el 
Aeropuerto de Santa Mónica. También hemos podido acoger en Santa Mónica a varias escuelas y empresas desplazadas 
por el incendio de Palisades gracias a la colaboración y dedicación de nuestro personal. 
Este presupuesto se basa en ese espíritu de colaboración y dedicación para explorar la activación de nuestro centro de 
la ciudad, la playa y el muelle a través de más eventos, asociaciones y la creación de zonas de entretenimiento. Con el 
liderazgo y la visión establecidos por el Consejo de la ciudad, este presupuesto sitúa a nuestra comunidad en la senda 
del crecimiento a largo plazo y de las oportunidades que presentan los grandes acontecimientos programados para los 
próximos años, que culminarán con los Juegos Olímpicos de 2028.

===== PAGE 24 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
19
CONTEXTO FISCAL 
Gastos
El presupuesto general propuesto para la ciudad de Santa Mónica es de $789.9 millones en el año fiscal 2025-26 y de 
$825.5 millones en el año fiscal 2026-27, neto de reembolsos y transferencias entre fondos de la ciudad. Esto refleja las 
actividades operativas y de capital de 31 fondos a través de 15 departamentos y aproximadamente 2,135 puestos 
permanentes y temporales equivalentes a tiempo completo (FTE). 
El mayor componente del presupuesto corresponde al Fondo General, que se financia predominantemente con ingresos 
fiscales y presta servicios compartidos por igual por todos los miembros de la comunidad y los visitantes. El presupuesto 
del Fondo General asciende a $480.9 millones en el año fiscal 2025-26 y a $495.8 millones en el año fiscal 2026-27. 
El presupuesto de la ciudad también incluye varios fondos de empresas y fondos de ingresos especiales, fondos que se 
destinan a usos específicos o que se basan en la utilización de recursos por parte de particulares. 
• Entre los fondos más importantes que contribuyen a las operaciones de la Ciudad, los Fondos de Agua, Aguas
Residuales, Big Blue Bus (BBB), el Aeropuerto, Recuperación y Reciclaje de Recursos (RRR) y el Cementerio tienen
ingresos suficientes para cubrir las necesidades operativas y de capital durante el período bienal.
• Se prevé que los Fondos de Recreación del Muelle y la Playa requieran subvenciones y anticipos durante el periodo
presupuestario bienal, por un total aproximado de $7.0 millones. Las limitaciones continuas de ingresos, incluido
el cierre del estacionamiento Pier Deck debido a problemas operativos y los planes pendientes para ajustar las
tarifas de estacionamiento en la playa, están contribuyendo significativamente a la situación. Actualmente, el
personal está realizando un estudio sobre el estacionamiento en toda la ciudad, que incluye un análisis de la
oferta y la demanda de estacionamiento, cuyas recomendaciones se esperan para finales de 2025 con el fin de
informar sobre posibles cambios en las tarifas de estacionamiento que se presentarían al Consejo de la ciudad y a
la Comisión Costera de California en 2025.
• Los Fondos de Tecnologías de la Información y de Administración de Vehículos están a la espera del reembolso de
las contribuciones del Fondo General, que se suspendieron temporalmente para ayudar a hacer frente a los
desafíos inmediatos planteados por la pandemia. Como resultado, estos fondos de servicios internos tuvieron que
restringir o posponer la sustitución de equipos y vehículos, priorizando solo las necesidades más críticas.
• El Fondo Fiduciario de la Vivienda también está a la espera del reembolso de los fondos prestados por el Fondo
General, que se utilizaron para mitigar los efectos de la pandemia y hacer frente a reclamaciones legales.
El enfoque presupuestario bienal de la Ciudad significa que el año fiscal 2025-26 representa el año basado en la 
excepción para nuestro Presupuesto Bienal del Programa de Mejoras de Capital (CIP). El presupuesto del CIP para el año 
fiscal 2025-26 es de $108.5 millones, de los cuales $15.2 millones representan la parte correspondiente al Fondo 
General. Antes de la pandemia, la asignación del Fondo General al CIP era de $21 millones al año. Este importe se 
redujo a $7.8 millones en el año fiscal 2020-21 y ha aumentado gradualmente desde entonces. Sin embargo, la 
reducción del financiamiento ha tenido como consecuencia el aplazamiento del mantenimiento de los equipos y la 
infraestructura, lo que ha provocado un aumento de los costos de reparación y/o sustitución, una mayor necesidad de 
reparaciones de emergencia para hacer frente a las fallas del sistema y una menor eficacia de las operaciones. Las 

===== PAGE 25 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
20
actuales asignaciones del Fondo General al CIP son insuficientes para hacer frente al creciente retraso en el 
mantenimiento o para financiar nuevas inversiones en servicios comunitarios, que siguen en suspenso debido a la 
presión financiera causada por la pandemia. En este momento, un total de $456.6 millones en proyectos permanecen sin 
fondos y se les está haciendo seguimiento para considerarlos en futuros ciclos de financiamiento. Más del 95.6% 
($436.5 millones) de la lista de proyectos sin financiamiento corresponde a solicitudes de recursos del Fondo General, 
mientras que el 4.4% adicional ($20.1 millones) corresponde a solicitudes de infraestructura para recursos del Fondo del 
Muelle. les, fondos que se destinan a usos específicos o que se basan en la utilización de recursos por parte de 
particulares.
Ingresos
El presupuesto de ingresos propuesto para toda la ciudad asciende a $810.2 millones en el año fiscal 2025-26 y a 
$854.9 millones en el año fiscal 2026-27, netos de reembolsos y transferencias entre fondos de la ciudad. 
El mayor componente del presupuesto se encuentra en el Fondo General, que se financia predominantemente con 
ingresos fiscales. El presupuesto del Fondo General asciende a $470.4 millones en el año fiscal 2025-26 y a $488.4 
millones en el año fiscal 2026-27. 
Históricamente, la diversa base impositiva de Santa Mónica ha proporcionado estabilidad financiera, pero la ciudad se 
enfrenta a desafíos constantes debido a su dependencia del comercio minorista, el turismo y la hotelería, sectores 
duramente golpeados por la pandemia y que siguen luchando por recuperarse. Aunque la actividad de los visitantes se 
está recuperando, sigue siendo lenta, y las tendencias de trabajo a distancia han reducido la población diurna al 60% de 
los niveles de 2019. Estos cambios repercuten en el gasto de los consumidores y en la recaudación del impuesto sobre 
las ventas, y contribuyen a elevar las tasas de desocupación de comercios y empresas en comparación con los 
promedios regionales. Estos factores están afectando los ingresos del Fondo General.
Los ingresos por el Impuesto de Ocupación Transitoria, un contribuyente clave al Fondo General, se están recuperando 
más lentamente de lo esperado a pesar de que la Medida CS aumentara las tasas de impuesto en 2023. Los incendios 
forestales de Los Ángeles y la geopolítica han provocado un repunte más lento del turismo, que se prevé que no alcance 
los niveles de 2019 hasta finales de 2026 o principios de 2027. Desde la pandemia, el sector de los viajes no se había 
enfrentado a este nivel de incertidumbre. Desde la dificultad de prever las tendencias futuras hasta las alarmantes 
caídas en todos los sectores y los titulares mundiales que ponen en duda los viajes a EE.UU., el sector se encuentra en 
un punto precario, lo que ha frenado el crecimiento de los ingresos en este ámbito.
La recaudación del impuesto sobre las ventas también se ha visto afectada por la reducción del gasto de los 
consumidores en el comercio minorista y otros ámbitos, especialmente en los sectores del lujo y los vehículos eléctricos. 
Factores como la subida del 29% en el precio de los autos desde la pandemia, los mayores costos de financiamiento, el 
aumento de las tasas de interés y las primas de seguros han impulsado estos cambios. Los restaurantes, especialmente 
los de alta cocina, están experimentando descensos a medida que los consumidores optan por opciones más asequibles.
Los ingresos relacionados con los estacionamientos, otra importante fuente de recursos, registran un modesto 
crecimiento anual del 1.75%. Sin embargo, se espera que los cambios impulsados por la pandemia, como el aumento de 
las compras en línea, el trabajo a distancia y los métodos de transporte alternativos (por ejemplo, viajes compartidos, 
transporte público, bicicletas y monopatines) limiten la demanda futura de estacionamiento. Políticas como el 
estacionamiento gratuito en el centro durante los primeros 90 minutos influyen aún más en estas tendencias. 
En conjunto, estas fuentes de ingresos -impuesto de ocupación transitoria, impuestos sobre las ventas e ingresos 
relacionados con los estacionamientos (incluidos los impuestos sobre las instalaciones de estacionamiento) - 
representan un significativo 45.4% de los ingresos del Fondo General. Los desafíos en estos ámbitos afectan 
directamente la capacidad de la ciudad para financiar servicios esenciales, ejecutar nuevos proyectos y responder a las 
necesidades cambiantes de la comunidad. Abordar estas tendencias de los ingresos es vital para garantizar la 
estabilidad fiscal a largo plazo y mantener la capacidad de invertir en servicios clave.

===== PAGE 26 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
21
SOSTENIBILIDAD FISCAL 
El presupuesto se basa en las previsiones financieras a cinco años. Para incluir un programa o servicio en curso en el 
Presupuesto, debe existir la capacidad de financiar este gasto a largo plazo utilizando ingresos en curso, limitando al 
mismo tiempo el uso de reservas asignadas o restringidas, o reservas de capital circulante. La Previsión del Fondo 
General indica que los gastos superarán a los ingresos anualmente durante el periodo presupuestario. Para equilibrar el 
presupuesto se requiere el uso de aproximadamente $49 millones en reservas durante los años fiscales 2025-26 y 
2026-27, teniendo en cuenta que las negociaciones laborales están en curso y el impacto fiscal aún no se ha finalizado. 
El personal recomienda el uso de estas reservas para evitar mayores impactos en el servicio y el personal. La ciudad está 
comprometida con el desarrollo económico y nuestra capacidad para mantener espacios limpios y seguros, conservar 
calles y aceras, hacer cumplir los códigos de construcción, tramitar permisos y licencias comerciales y acoger eventos 
respaldan todos estos esfuerzos.
A 30 de junio de 2024, las reservas no restringidas del Fondo General ascendían al 61% de lo que eran a 30 de junio de 
2019. Unas reservas sólidas son necesarias para amortiguar la prestación de servicios frente al impacto de los gastos de 
emergencia, los pasivos contingentes y la incertidumbre económica. Desde 2020, las demandas sobre estas reservas se 
han visto agravadas por: 
• Grave pérdida de ingresos como consecuencia de la pandemia (estimada en $195 millones hasta el 30 de junio de 
2024, en comparación con las previsiones anteriores a la pandemia).
• Prestación de servicios esenciales durante la pandemia de COVID-19.  
• Pagos de más de $229.8 millones en acuerdos legales en los últimos tres años relacionados con acusaciones de 
abusos sexuales por parte de un antiguo empleado.  
De cara al futuro, la ciudad se enfrenta a otras 170 demandas en la materia relacionadas con acusaciones de abusos 
sexuales por parte de un antiguo empleado, así como 4 demandas contra otro antiguo empleado en otro asunto. La 
Ciudad interpuso su propia demanda solicitando a sus aseguradoras el reembolso de las indemnizaciones pagadas y por 
pagar en los asuntos Uller, pero el importe del reembolso es incierto y no se prevé ningún reembolso hasta dentro de al 
menos dos años. Del mismo modo, el caso de la Ley de Derecho de Voto de California o CVRA fue visto recientemente 
por la Corte Suprema de California, que emitió un dictamen devolviendo el caso a la Cámara de Apelaciones. La Cámara 
de Apelaciones devolvió el caso al tribunal de primera instancia. El caso podría ir a juicio a finales de 2025.
El programa de mejoras de capital también sigue sin fondos suficientes, con un creciente retraso en el mantenimiento 
aplazado, las estimaciones presupuestarias para los proyectos financiados corren peligro por los posibles aumentos de 
costos debidos a los aranceles y la incertidumbre en torno al financiamiento federal. Por último, este presupuesto 
también debe tener en cuenta los acuerdos laborales sucesores para las 11 unidades de negociación que deben 
equilibrar cuidadosamente las necesidades del personal con la incertidumbre financiera del futuro inmediato. 

===== PAGE 27 =====

FY 2025-27 PRESUPUESTO BIENAL PROPUESTO
MENSAJE DEL ADMINISTRADOR MUNICIPAL
22
Juntos, estos esfuerzos proporcionan recursos esenciales muy necesarios para hacer frente a los desafíos, financiar 
programas vitales y, al mismo tiempo, fomentar una economía local resiliente a través de una planificación y una 
colaboración meditadas. El enfoque proactivo de la ciudad refleja su compromiso con un futuro fuerte y vibrante.
• Constituir una reserva del Fondo de Emergencia, por un total del 14% de los gastos corrientes, para finales del año
fiscal 2024-25.
• Preservar los servicios y programas de la ciudad, limitando al mismo tiempo el crecimiento de los departamentos e
implementando medidas de ahorro para hacer frente al déficit operativo de manera eficaz.
• Pograr un fuerte apoyo de los votantes en 2024 para dos medidas de ingresos vitales: La Medida F, que moderniza
el impuesto sobre licencias comerciales por primera vez desde 1990, generando $3 millones anuales, al tiempo
que, entre otras cosas, reduce las tasas de impuestos para la mayoría de las empresas que ganan menos de $5
millones. La Medida K aumentó los impuestos sobre los estacionamientos privados, con una recaudación prevista
de $6.7 millones, de los que al menos la mitad se destinarán a seguridad pública.
La ciudad se enfrenta a un camino lleno de desafíos, ya que tiene que garantizar su futuro financiero, restablecer los 
servicios y programas de la ciudad tan necesarios, abordar la creciente lista de tareas de mantenimiento aplazadas en 
nuestras calles, parques e instalaciones de la ciudad, y crear estabilidad para los años venideros. Aunque el presupuesto 
del Fondo General para el año fiscal 2025-27 requiere retirar aproximadamente $49 millones de sus reservas, la ciudad 
está dando pasos clave para trazar un camino a seguir: 
Respetuosamente presentado,
Elaine Polachek
Administradora Municipal Interino


===== PAGE 28 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS

===== PAGE 29 =====

23
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
 
BACKGROUND 
Santa Monica instituted a 10% Parking Facility T ax (PFT) in 1993. This tax currently applies to all public and 
private parking lots and structures in the City for occupying a parking space in any parking facility.  At the 
November 2024 election, voters approved T ax Measure K, to increase the PFT by 8% on priva tely-
operated parking lots raising the total tax to 18% to generate approximately $6.7 million annually to help 
fund city services. Measure K was accompanied by an advisory measure, Measure PSK, to guide 
spending of additional resources, which was also approved by the voters.   
Ballot Language on Uses 
Measure K: T o maintain essential city services, including enhancing public safety, creating safe routes to 
school to protect children, and lowering the risk of fatal traffic accidents. 
Measure PSK - Parking Facility T ax Advisory: Half of the additional revenue raised be used to protect 
public safety in Santa Monica, including attracting and retaining well -trained police officers and 
firefighters, improving crime and homelessness preventi on services, and increasing police patrols and 
enhancing emergency medical response in neighborhoods and public. 
For more information on PFT: https://finance.smgov.net/fees-taxes/parking-facilities-tax. 
Fo
r more information on the October 8, 2024, Council Budget Study Session: Budget Study Session on 
Enhancing Public Safety and Addressing Homelessness. 


===== PAGE 30 =====

24
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
INITIA TIVES FUNDED WITH MEASURE K REVENUES 
Dept. Description Perm. 
FTE 
T emp. 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
Police Expand Homeless Liaison Program (HLP).  A dedicated 
police officer assigned to the homeless liaison program, 
especially on the weekend shift, is vital for bridging the 
gap between enforcement and compassion. With the 
highest number of unhoused individuals on our streets 
during these peak times, this role ensures that those in 
crisis receive the help they need while holding 
accountable those whose behavior endangers public 
safety. It’s not just about presence; it’s about purpose-
driven policing that balances empathy, order, and long-
term community impact. 
- Add 1 Police Officer position.
1.0 $234,174 $228,623 
Police Expand Drone as a First Responder Program (DFR).  
Assigning two officers to the DFR program is essential for 
maximizing the impact of this cutting-edge technology 
while ensuring sound, experienced judgment guides 
every deployment. These officers combine technical 
expertise with frontline policing experience, which is key 
to quickly distinguishing between truly dangerous 
situations and those that can be safely de-escalated. 
Their ability to interpret unfolding incidents from the air in 
real time protects both the public and our officers. By 
assigning two officers, we ensure redundancy, shift 
coverage, and sustained operational readiness, making 
this one of the most effective modern tools for proactive 
crime prevention and response. 
-Add 2 Police Officer positions and equipment funds
2.0 520,098 510,807 
Police Proactive security monitoring solution for Library, Miles 
Playhouse and Camera Obscura.  The service provides 
real-time detection and intervention, which proactively 
addresses crime and loitering at public spaces. This 
effective security solution supports law enforcement and 
acts as a force multiplier for public safety. 
-Add funds for equipment and subscription costs
101,750 105,311 
Police Expand traffic enforcement personnel.  In a densely 
populated city like Santa Monica, where we’ve seen a 
troubling rise in traffic fatalities and severe injury 
collisions, dedicated traffic enforcement officers are 
essential to protecting lives. Their focused presence on 
our streets serves as the strongest deterrent against 
excessive speed and aggressive driving behaviors that 
threaten not just drivers, but also the safety of 
pedestrians and cyclists. Enforcement isn’t merely about 
issuing citations; it’s about preventing tragedy, restoring 
2.0  485,898   457,846  


===== PAGE 31 =====

25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Description Perm. 
FTE 
T emp. 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
order to chaotic roadways, and sending a clear message 
that reckless driving has no place in our community.  This 
proposal responds to City Council’s request at the  1/28/25
meeting, Item 16.L 
- Add 2 Police Officer positions 
Fire Pilot a city-operated Ambulance Operator (AO)  Program
The program is a new initiative that increases the City's
capacity to provide timely ambulance transport by
deploying Basic Life Support (BLS) ambulances staffed
with part-time EMT s. This program improves patient
care by reducing delays in ambulance availability,
especially for low-acuity calls, and helps free up 
paramedic engine companies for higher-priority 
incidents. Designed with long-term sustainability in mind, 
the AO Program is expected to become self-sustaining 
through cost recovery from insurance reimbursements 
and other revenue sources, while also creating a 
professional development pipeline for future firefighter 
candidates. 
-Add 3.0 full time equivalent as-needed hours
3.0  149,986   155,236  
Housing & 
Human 
Services 
Ongoing funding for the Therapeutic Transport Team, a 
specialized program in partnership with the County of LA 
Department of Mental Health (DMH). This team responds 
alongside first responders to mental health crises, 
assisting SMPD and SMFD with both emergency and non-
emergency calls involving housed and unhoused 
individuals. County staff conduct thorough evaluations, 
provide referrals to mental health services, transport 
clients to psychiatric care when needed, and offer 
follow-up support.  The program is currently funded 
through FY 2026-27.  Sustained funding would guarantee 
the program's continuity and enable its expansion to 
24/7 operation.  Program continuation is contingent on 
the County continuing the program and the County 
continuing to subsidize costs above the City’s budgeted 
$489K. 
-$489,000 would be required starting in FY 2027-28 
Public W orks Ongoing funding for a proactive streetlight repair pprrooggrraamm
 to reduce the City's backlog of repairs. This funding
would restore an electrician position, support continuous
purchases of copper wire and related materials, and
cover contractual services for wire theft repairs. It would
also provide essential supplies like replacement fixtures,
poles, and worn electrical components. Additionally,
the department plans to consolidate all City electricians 
under one unit to enhance coordination and resource
1.0  750,000   776,250  


===== PAGE 32 =====

26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Description Perm. 
FTE 
T emp. 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
allocation, ensuring efficient streetlight maintenance
and timely repairs. 
-Add 1.0 FTE Electrician and funds for materials
Dept. of  
Transportation 
Project would modify the oft-maligned Z gates on thee  EExxppoo
Bike Path to improve the convenience and utilization
of the facility for cyclists, which is especially important
given the upcoming construction project to add a
westbound protected bikeway on Colorado Avenue 
between 17th and 5th streets.  (One-time). 
This proposal responds to various Councilmember Discussion
Items (16 Items). 
-Add funding for project expenses
 200,000  
Dept. of  
Transportation 
Expand License Plate Recognition (LPR) system. The City 
LPR pilot program at Parking Structures 4 and 5 in 
downtown Santa Monica, launched in mid-December 
2024, is proving effective. The system integrates license 
plate recognition with the City's parking infrastructure, 
streamlining vehicle entry and exit while reducing lost 
revenue from illegal exiting of structures by 66% 
according to initial data.  Additionally, SMPD will be 
utilizing the LPR system for law enforcement, aiding in the 
identification of stolen or wanted vehicles, stolen license 
plates, and missing persons. Expanding LPR to other 
downtown facilities and the pier deck parking would 
further recover revenue lost from illegal exits and 
enhance public safety. (One-time) 
-Add funding for equipment and installation
 600,000   600,000  
Dept. of  
Transportation 
Implement no right on red restrictions with signage at the 
scramble crosswalks in the Downtown neighborhood to 
improve safety and the pedestrian experience by 
reducing conflicts with vehicles. (One-time). 
This proposal responds to various Councilmember Discussion 
Items (16 Items). 
-Add funding for project expenses
 10,000  
Dept. of  
Transportation 
Ongoing funding for Safe Neighborhood Streets Program.
to accelerate Vision Zero and improve local street 
safety by slowing traffic and reducing crashes.  
This program includes a one-time creation of a 
Neighborhood Traffic Calming T oolkit to establish 
installation criteria and in-house standards for quick-
build infrastructure including bollards, Rapid Rectangular 
Flashing Beacons (RRFBs), and Speed Cushions. 
Ongoing funding supports toolkit development, small-
scale interventions, evaluation, design, and 
implementation of rapid solutions for high-crash areas 
identified in the Local Roadway Safety Plan (LRSP) and 
2.0 461,414  528,542  


===== PAGE 33 =====

27
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Description Perm. 
FTE 
T emp. 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
areas of concern identified by the community and 
stakeholders. It also funds a Signs and Markings 
T echnician to install and maintain city traffic markings, 
street signs, and roadway safety features, plus a 
customer service position to support the Mobility Division, 
enabling transportation planners to focus on education 
and outreach. This proposal responds to various 
Councilmember Discussion Items (16 Items). 
-Add 1 Signs and Marking T echnician, 1 customer service 
position, and ongoing project funding 
Dept. of  
Transportation 
The City has successfully secured grants to fund mobility 
projects, maximizing local dollars while requiring a 
matching contribution. Historically, the Transportation 
Impact Fee (TIF) served as the primary local match 
source, but a state law change now delays fee collection 
until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, creating 
a multiyear funding gap. This has significantly reduced 
resources for advancing key mobility and safe street 
initiatives, including the Local Roadway Safety Plan, Bike 
Action Plan Amendment, and other community priorities.  
T o address this challenge, staff proposes using Measure 
K funds as a local grant match for ongoing and future 
projects. This includes an Affordable Housing and 
Sustainable Communities (AHSC) grant to support 
affordable housing at the former PS3 site, procure four 
battery-electric buses for BBB service enhancements, 
and implement a bi-directional protected bikeway, 
repaved roadway, and curb extensions along 14th Street 
between Washington Avenue and Pico Boulevard. 
Additionally, funding would support a Traffic Engineer 
position to expedite design reviews, provide technical 
assistance during construction, and bolster capacity for 
advancing major initiatives like Unlocking 
Transformational Mobility Projects Through Grant Match 
and the Safe Neighborhood Streets program.  
-Add 1 Traffic Engineer and funding for local match 
starting FY 2026-27 
1.0 176,567 1,087,119  
Dept. of  
Transportation 
Ongoing funding for Civil Engineer and City Traffic Engineer 
positions in response to a state law change affecting 
 the timing of Transportation Impact Fee (TIF) collection.
The new law delays fee collection until the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, creating a multiyear funding
gap, worsened by a slowdown in development and
construction. Originally, these positions were to be
funded primarily through TIF, but with the revenue delay,
staff propose using Measure K funds to maintain them.
This preserves TIF resources for critical transportation
improvements like sidewalks, crosswalks, and bicycle
473,060  498,748  


===== PAGE 34 =====

28
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Description Perm. 
FTE 
T emp. 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
facilities. Once TIF revenues stabilize, all funds can be
directed toward mobility capital projects and grant
matching. 
-Continue funding 1 Civil Engineer and 1 City Traffic 
Engineer 
To t a l 9.0 3.0 $4,162,947  $4,948,482 
The following items are existing budgeted programs and services for which, if funding is preserved by use 
of Measure K revenues, also address existing Public Safety and Safe Streets & Neighborhood initiatives. 
Absent funding these items with Measure K revenues, the items would have to be unfunded/eliminated. 
Department Description 
Community Development Continue to fund 3 Vacant Positions - Assistant Planner, Code Enforcement Officer, and 
Combination Building Inspector –  approximately $369k annually 
Information Services Funds to start building a Data Platform infrastructure - approximately $250k annually 
starting FY 2026-27 
Public Works Funds for various custodial services supplies & expenses - approximately $152k annually 
starting FY 2026-27.  Funds to fill 1 vacant custodian position and keep funding for 
custodial services impacting restroom maintenance at the Beach, Pier and City Parks - 
approximately $708k annually 
Police Continue to fund overtime for Special Deployments in the Police Department - Only 
reduce budget by $700k annually and not the $2.0 million proposed through the 
department’s budget reduction proposal. 
*All items are funded on an ongoing basis unless otherwise indicated.


===== PAGE 35 =====

29
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
FULL INVENTORY OF ALL MEASURE K FUNDING REQUESTS 
This list reflects all proposals submitted by departments for use of Measure K funds, including items 
presented to Council at the October 8, 2024, Budget Study Session on Enhancing Public Safety and 
Addressing Homelessness.  Items in green are included in the proposed initiative s to be funded with 
Measure K revenues.  Items in yellow are included in the proposed initiatives to be funded with Measure K 
revenues, but have been adjusted from the version that was originally submitted.  Items not highlighted 
were considered but are not being included as recommended for funding. 
Dept. Description FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
City Attorney  Expand support for Criminal Prosecution Unit - Adding one Sr. Legal 
Analyst to support grant administration for programs like STEP Court, 
restore victim advocacy services, and seek new grant opportunities.  
This would free one attorney on the team to focus on criminal 
prosecution instead of grant management. 
1.0 $193,576 $200,351  
City Manager Expand support for 911 public safety communications dispatch team - 
Adding a Public Safety Lead Dispatcher would ensure prompt and 
effective response to emergency calls and reduce workload strain on 
the 911 team. 
1.0 138,642            143,494  
City Manager Expand emergency preparedness community engagement efforts –  
Adding a Community Engagement Coordinator position to proactively 
organize and attend in-person events to educate the public on 
disaster preparedness, local hazards, how to call 911, and SMAlerts and 
educating the public about “T ext to 911” on Santa Monica Big Blue Buses 
and about reporting emergencies to dispatch for improved 
community education and understanding of dispatch services.  
1.0 118,816             122,974  
Dept. of 
Transportation 
Project funding to modify the oft-maligned Z gates on the Expo Bike 
Path –  Full description of item is included in the Initiatives funded with 
Measure K revenues section listed above. 
200,000 
Expand License Plate Recognition (LPR) system –  Full description of 
item is included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues 
section listed above. 
600,000 600,000 
Expand License Plate Recognition (LPR) system – original proposal 1,200,000 
Implement no right on red restrictions with signage at the scramble 
crosswalks in the Downtown –  Full description of item is included in the 
Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues section listed above. 
10,000  
Ongoing funding for Safe Neighborhood Streets Program –  Full 
description of item is included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K 
revenues section listed above. 
2.0            461,414  528,542  
TIF funding for local grant match for ongoing and future projects and 
funds for a Traffic Engineer position –  Full description of item is 
included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues section 
listed above. 
1.0 176,567 1,087,119  
Ongoing funding for Civil Engineer and City Traffic Engineer positions 
due to change in State Law (TIF) –  Full description of item is included in 
the Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues section listed above. 
473,060  498,748  
Dept. of 
Transportation 
Automated Bike Lane Enforcement Program –  This program would 
address Council direction from September 26, 2023 (item 8K) to 
create an automated bike lane enforcement program using cameras 
mounted on parking enforcement vehicles. A successful pilot program 
utilizing only two parking enforcement vehicles was conducted in 2024 
          447,000  486,000  


===== PAGE 36 =====

30
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Description FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
that found 1,679 violations over 6 weeks, an average of almost 8 per 
day.  
Dept. of 
Transportation 
Replace speed humps with speed cushions for improved emergency 
response times - This one-time project would replace the existing 
speed hump cushions on 16th, 20th, 25th, and 28th streets between 
Pico and Ocean Park boulevards to improve emergency response 
times in critical lifesaving incidents. Successful implementation of 
these modifications is necessary to build trust with Fire Department 
personnel necessary for potential further deployment of speed 
cushions on additional corridors in the city, where they are routinely 
requested by the community. (One-time) 
240,000  
Dept. of 
Transportation 
Multi-Modal Traffic Signal Upgrades - This would enable 
reprogramming traffic signals to support the safety and convenience 
of multi-modal transportation, in line with Council action on March 21, 
2023 (Item 16B). Treatments could include Leading Pedestrian Interval 
(LPI) to give pedestrians the walk signal before cars get the green to 
increase safety and visibility, pedestrian recall to eliminate the need to 
push the button to get the walk signal at certain locations or times of 
day, rest in red overnight to reduce nighttime speeding, bicycle 
detection zones, and coordinating traffic signals to provide a “green 
wave” for cyclists. Funding would pay for consultant work to address 
approximately 25 intersections and upgrade two traffic signals to 
Accessible Pedestrian Signals (APS) which are ADA-compliant devices 
that provide audible, tactile, and/or vibrating cues to indicate when it is 
safe to cross. 
300,000  300,000  
Fire Pilot a city-operated Ambulance Operator (AO) Program –  Full 
description of item is included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K 
revenues section listed above. 
3.0 149,986  155,236  
Full Ambulance Operator Program (19.8 FTE) - original proposal 19.8 1,430,808  
Fire Advanced Provider Unit - APU program improves services for persons 
experiencing homelessness and other vulnerable populations. Building 
on insights from the FY 2021-23 Community Response Unit (CRU) 
program and successful initiatives in neighboring cities like Beverly Hills 
and Los Angeles, the APU will enhance treatment, care, and resource 
accessibility for the city’s most at-risk individuals.  The APU would 
operate two units, each staffed by a Firefighter Paramedic and a 
Nurse Practitioner.  
4.0    1,428,826  1,345,372  
Housing & 
Human 
Services 
Ongoing funding for the Therapeutic Transport T eam –  Full description 
of item is included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues 
section listed above.  $489,000 starting in FY 2027-28 
0.0 
Housing & 
Human 
Services 
Downtown Outreach T eam –  Establish a new multidisciplinary team 
(MDT) by adding an additional MDT Outreach T eam to enforce 
trespassing and no sit/lie doorway ordinances specifically in the city’s 
downtown core, with an initial focus on the Third Street Promenade, 
and connect people to services and programs. 
234,025  242,216  
Police  Expand Homeless Liaison Program (HLP) –  Full description of item is 
included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues section 
listed above. 
1.0     234,174 228,623  


===== PAGE 37 =====

31
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Description FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
Expand Drone as a First Responder Program (DFR) –  Full description of 
item is included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues 
section listed above. 
2.0 520,098  510,807  
Proactive security monitoring solution for Library, Miles Playhouse and 
Camera Obscura –  Full description of item is included in the Initiatives 
funded with Measure K revenues section listed above. 
101,750   105,311  
Expand traffic enforcement personnel –  Full description of item is 
included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K revenues section 
listed above. 
2.0       485,898  457,846  
Expand traffic enforcement personnel (7 Sworn/1 Non-Sworn FTE) - 
original proposal 
8.0 1,808,648  1,673,438  
Police Police T echnology –  Provide funding to cover existing technologies 
within the Police department, including replacing tasers, body worn 
cameras, and vehicle technologies that have all seen a sizable 
increase in costs similar to those experienced across the city. 
744,015  770,045  
Police Police Training –  Increase funding in the Police department budget for 
officer training (e.g., use of force, de-escalation tactics) to ensure 
Santa Monica police are trained in best practices and emerging 
strategies to ensure a safe community. 
200,000  207,000  
Police Special Investigations Unit –  Add one sergeant and one officer to re-
establish a Special Investigations Unit (SIU) that would provide tactical 
surveillance and assist in identifying and apprehending dangerous 
individuals. The department may also need to divert officers from 
other duties to fully staff this unit. 
2.0 824,062  619,460  
Public W orks Ongoing funding for a proactive streetlight repair program –  Full 
description of item is included in the Initiatives funded with Measure K 
revenues section listed above. 
1.0 750,000  776,250  
Ongoing funding for a proactive streetlight repair program - original 
proposal 
1.0 1,000,000  1,035,000  


===== PAGE 38 =====

32
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
 
BUDGET REDUCTION AND NEW REVENUE GENERA TING INITIA TIVES 
Based on Council direction from the March 8th workshop, staff were asked to bring forth 
recommendations for the use of Measure K revenues estimated at $6.7 million based on the ballot 
measure language, including use of at least half of the funding for Public Safety.  As a result, staff were 
required to free up $6.7 million in General Fund fund balance to address new services related to Measure 
K. Because of the City’s fragile financial position, therefore, Council also asked staff to bring forward 
recommended cost saving and revenue generating measures equal to the Measure K revenues so the 
city would not have to more heavily rely on its very limited reserves to balance the budget and maintain 
vital city services and operations.   
 
Process 
Each department funded by the General Fund was required to formulate scenarios to achieve savings or 
generate new revenues beginning in FY 2025-26.  Spread evenly across all general fund departments, 
$6.7 million is equivalent to approximately a 1.75% budget reduction in the General Fund for each 
department.  Departments could bring forward recommendations that would: 
 Identify existing services/programs that could be discontinued to achieve cost savings.  
 Identify new realistic revenue-generating opportunities. 
 Identify current vacant positions that would be frozen for this biennial period. 
 
The following is the recommended list of General Fund budget reductions and new revenue generating 
initiatives: 
 
Department Description FTE 
FY 25-26 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 25-26 
Revenue 
New/ 
(Loss) 
FY 26-27 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 26-27 
Revenue 
New / 
(Loss) 
City Council Reduce various operating expenses, 
including auto reimbursements, 
telephone utilities, and food purchases. 
 $16,347   $16,919   
City Manager Eliminate Neighborhood Grant Program  49,000   49,000   
Reduce various operating expenses, 
including reducing printed, office supplies, 
mailings/forms, training expenses. 
 194,317         201,118   
Dept. of 
Transportation 
DOT 
DOT 
DOT 
Add new meters on Ocean Park 16th to 
18th 
  222,552   230,341  
Increased revenues from License Plate 
Recognition at Structures 2, 4 & 5 
  237,000   245,295  
License Plate Recognition (LPR) Project.   425,000   850,000  
Reduce convenience fee (credit card) 
costs for parking transactions, no longer 
absorbing the cost, but rather passing the 
charge-through to the user. 
 200,000   500,000   
Finance 
FINANCE 
Increase audits on self-reporting taxes 
and purchasing card and digital market 
platform rebate program. 
    170,000  
 
175,950  
Water Fund partially fund (50%) of the 
Principal Buyer position. 
 85,169   88,150   


===== PAGE 39 =====

33
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
 
Department Description FTE 
FY 25-26 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 25-26 
Revenue 
New/ 
(Loss) 
FY 26-27 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 26-27 
Revenue 
New / 
(Loss) 
Fire 
FIRE 
East LA College Partnership 
reimbursements & increased Mutual Aid 
Administration Fee to align with what 
other agencies are charging. 
  213,000   220,455  
Pilot Ambulance Operator Program (3.0 
FTE). 
  750,000   776,250  
Housing & Human  
Services 
Reduce various operating expenses, 
including utilities and building 
maintenance expenses related the Ken 
Edwards Center, as the current tenant 
(WISE & Healthy Aging) has been 
responsible for these costs since the 
execution of a new  lease in 2022. 
Additionally, the budget is being reduced 
for training  expenses, conferences, and 
professional services. 
 359,959      365,445   
Human  
Resources 
Reduce use of compensation services, 
which will be handled in-house. 
 115,582   119,627   
Information 
Services 
T emporarily reduce budget earmarked to 
start building a Data Platform 
infrastructure. 
-0.3 237,548     
Library Increased revenues from increased rental 
activity and new lease revenue. 
 
 
108,000   111,780  
Police Reduce OT assignments across most 
details. 
 700,000    700,000    
Public W orks 
PW 
PW 
PW 
Increase community garden fees from 
20% cost recovery to 60% cost recovery, 
pending advisory board approval 
 
 
30,000      30,000  
Eliminate weekend trash service with 
Mariposa for Ishihara & Hotchkiss Parks. 
 9,799             10,142   
Reduce various custodial services 
expenses, including reducing services at 
the Public Safety Facility from two shifts to 
one. 
 144,000   
 
 
Stop fertilizing sport fields in parks.  50,000  
 
51,750   
Recreation & 
Arts 
Add 2.0 FTE to Activate Beach and Pier. 2.0  (259,661) 473,517  (268,749) 490,090  
Records & 
Election Services 
Suspend - Passport Services Program. -1.0       105,505     (57,500)       112,810   (57,500) 
T otal Reductions and Revenues 1.9 $2,007,565  $2,571,569  $1,946,213 $3,072,661 
Net Impact to General Fund 
(combined reductions & revenue) 
                      $4,579,134                        $5,018,874 
 


===== PAGE 40 =====

34
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
FULL INVENTORY OF ALL DEP ARTMENT BUDGET REDUCTION PROPOSALS 
This list reflects all department proposed scenarios formulated to achieve savings or generate new 
revenues beginning in FY 2025-26.  Items in green are included in the proposed initiatives to fund Measure 
K initiatives.  Items in yellow are included in the proposed initiatives to fund Measure K initiatives but have 
been adjusted from the original proposal due to funding or operational limitations.   Items not highlighted 
were considered but are not being recommended to move forward.  Those items not recommended fell 
into one of two categories:  items staff believe are critical to support Council’s priorities of safety and safe 
streets and economic recovery or were deemed to require more analysis to ensure the anticipated 
savings or revenue could be achieved.   
Dept. Proposal Name FTE 
FY 25-26 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 25-26 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
FY 26-27 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 26-27 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
City Council Reduce various operating 
expenses, including auto 
reimbursements, telephone utilities, 
and food purchases. 
16,347           16,919  
City Attorney Reduce outside litigator cost by 
bringing some litigation in-house 
(Deputy City Attorney).  Not 
recommended as this would result 
in having to add a new permanent 
position resulting in ongoing costs. 
1.0 (250,000) (258,750) 
Community  
Development 
Pause recruitment for vacant 
positions - Code Enforcement 
Officer/Assistant Planner. Fewer 
positions would result in slower 
service and impact revenues.  
-2.0 252,826   (20,000) 261,675   (20,700) 
Pause recruitment for vacant 
position - Combination Building 
Inspector. One less position would 
result in slower inspection-
turnaround times and impact 
revenues.  
-1.0 173,450   (50,000) 179,521   (51,750) 
City Manager Eliminate Neighborhood Grant 
Program. 
       49,000         49,000  
Reduce various operating 
expenses, including reducing 
printed, office supplies, 
mailings/forms, training expenses. 
       194,317       (5,500)         201,118      (5,693) 
Dept. of  
Transportation  
Add new meters on Ocean Park 
16th to 18th. 
   222,552      230,341  
Increased revenues from License 
Plate Readers at Structures 2, 4 & 5. 
   237,000    245,295  
License Plate Reader (LPR) Project.    425,000    850,000  
Reduce convenience fee (credit 
card) costs for parking 
transactions, no longer absorbing 
the cost, but rather passing the 
charge-through to the user. 
    200,000      500,000  


===== PAGE 41 =====

35
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Proposal Name FTE 
FY 25-26 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 25-26 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
FY 26-27 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 26-27 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
Finance  Increase audits on self-reporting 
taxes and purchasing card and 
digital market platform rebate 
program. 
     170,000      175,950  
Water Fund partially fund (50%) of 
the Principal Buyer position. 
        85,169          88,150  
Fire  East LA College Partnership 
reimbursements & increased 
Mutual Aid Administration Fee to 
align with what other agencies are 
charging. 
     213,000    220,455  
Pilot Ambulance Operator Program 
(3.0 FTE). 
   750,000    776,250  
Housing &  
Human  
Services 
Reduce various operating 
expenses, including utilities and 
building maintenance expenses 
related the Ken Edwards Center, as 
the current tenant (WISE & Healthy 
Aging) has been responsible for 
these costs since the execution of a 
new lease in 2022. Additionally, the 
budget is being reduced for training 
expenses, conferences, and 
professional services. 
    359,959      365,445  
Human  
Resources 
Reduce use of compensation 
services, which will be handled in-
house. 
      115,582        119,627  
Information 
Services 
T emporarily reduce budget 
earmarked to start building a Data 
Platform infrastructure. (one-time) 
-0.3     237,548  
Reduce budget earmarked to start 
building a Data Platform 
infrastructure - original proposal. 
    245,862  
Library Increased revenues from increased 
rental activity and new lease 
revenue. 
    108,000        111,780  
Library Decrease in Library Collections for 
Digital and Print Media. This would 
impact the community at large and 
the Library would have reduced 
materials, increased hold times, 
limited access, declining 
circulation, and lower patron 
satisfaction. 
      101,500       105,053  
Police Reduce OT assignments across 
most details (one-time). 
    700,000      700,000  
Reduce OT assignments across 
most details - original proposal. 
2,000,000  2,070,000  


===== PAGE 42 =====

36
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Proposal Name FTE 
FY 25-26 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 25-26 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
FY 26-27 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 26-27 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
Police  Eliminate Crossing Guard program. 
This would reduce public safety at 
intersection crossings at the 
schools throughout the City. 
-5.8     258,692      267,746  
Eliminate Downtown Parking 
Structure Security Contract - Good 
Guard. This would affect public 
safety and cleanliness in the 
downtown area as the security 
guard services patrol the parking 
structures overnight. 
     410,827      425,206  
Eliminate four vacant Traffic 
Services Officer (TSO) positions. 
TSO positions enforce parking 
control ordinances and laws, as 
well as direct vehicle and 
pedestrian traffic. Eliminating the 
vacant positions would decrease 
public safety.  
-4.0     447,076      462,724  
Public W orks  Increase community garden fees 
from 20% cost recovery to 60% cost 
recovery, pending advisory board 
approval. 
      30,000       30,000  
Eliminate weekend trash service 
with Mariposa for Ishihara & 
Hotchkiss Parks. 
          9,799         10,142  
Stop fertilizing sport fields in parks.        50,000          51,750  
Reduce various custodial services 
expenses, including reducing 
services at the Public Safety Facility 
from two shifts to one. 
     144,000  
Reduce various custodial services 
supplies and expenses – original 
proposal. 
     149,040  
Public W orks  Pause recruitment for 1 vacant 
custodian position. This reduction is 
associated with the closures of the 
park restrooms.  Freezing this 
position would have implications in 
reducing the cleanliness of park 
restrooms and the ability of timely 
opening dog parks, cemetery and 
mausoleum, and tennis court sites.   
-1.0        89,301         92,427  
Reduce various custodial services 
impacting restroom maintenance 
at the Beach, Pier and City Parks. 
This reduction would impact the 
service frequency of some 
restrooms and result in restroom 
    574,808      594,926  


===== PAGE 43 =====

37
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
MEASURE K ENHANCEMENTS 
Dept. Proposal Name FTE 
FY 25-26 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 25-26 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
FY 26-27 
Reduct. / 
(Cost) 
FY 26-27 
Revenue 
New / (Loss) 
closures which would likely impact 
open restrooms, increasing 
maintenance-related issues.  
Recreation & Arts Add 1.0 FTE to Activate Beach and 
Pier. 
2.0  (259,661)     473,517  (268,749)  490,090  
Records & Election  
Services 
Suspend - Passport Services 
Program. 
-1.0      105,505    (57,500)         112,810   (57,500) 


===== PAGE 44 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY AREAS & PERFORMANCE 
MEASURES

===== PAGE 45 =====

38
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET 
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
 
1 Vouchers administered by the City may vary from year to year, depending on staff capacity, annual funding from the U.S. 
Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, the implementation of new or emergency programs, and program requirements. 
The following metrics reflect programs and services addressing the three Council-adopted priorities. 
This listing does not represent a comprehensive inventory but does demonstrate the breadth and level of 
service provided within each priority area 
PILLAR 1: HOUSING AND PREVENTION 
Performance Measure Department Operational Area FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
Target 
FY26/27 
Target 
Households supported 
through federally funded 
voucher programs 1 
HHSD Housing 
Vouchers 
1,695  1,684  1,699  1,712  1,717  
Number of unhoused 
individuals moved from local 
shelters and/or public 
spaces into permanent 
housing through use of 104 
Emergency Housing 
Vouchers (EHV) 
HHSD Housing 
Vouchers 
53
 28 16 -   -   
Households receiving 
housing legal assistance 
HHSD Eviction 
Protection 
576  760  765  870  970  
Households receiving short 
term Flex Fund assistance 
HHSD Eviction 
Protection 
44
 51 60 60       60  
Number of new City-funded 
affordable housing units 
opened 
HHSD Affordable 
Housing 
Production 
Program 
158  106      57         13     -   
Affordable housing units 
approved/received 
planning entitlements 
CDD Housing Element 
Implementation 
75 88 115 802     802  
Market Rate housing units 
approved/received 
planning entitlements 
CDD Housing Element 
Implementation 
413   756  996  1,803  1,804  
AFFORDABLE, LIV ABLE, & SECURE HOUSING FOR ALL 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 46 =====

39
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
 
 
2 T argets are not provided as this work is responsive to several factors, including economic conditions and new laws, that are 
beyond the City’s control but directly impact the areas measured. Mental Health crises are especially unpredictable. 
3 Per California law, police departments are prohibited from having targets and/or quotas for arrests/citations. 
PILLAR 2: BEHA VIORAL HEAL TH 
 
Performance Measure Department Operational Area FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
Target 
FY26/27 
Target 
  
People Experiencing 
Homelessness who received 
medical/mental/psychiatric/
substance use services 
HHSD/Fire/ 
Police 
Outreach 
 
1,125 1,316 - - - 
 
People Experiencing 
Homelessness who were 
placed in interim housing 
HHSD/ 
Police 
Outreach 
 
49 60 140 150 155 
  
People Experiencing 
Homelessness who were 
placed in permanent housing 
HHSD/Fire/ 
Police 
Outreach 
 
15 101 55 60 65 
  
 
 
PILLAR 3: CLEAN AND SAFE OPEN SP ACES 
 
Performance Measure Department Operational Area FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget  
Samoshel intakes by First 
Responders Pilot Program 
(New Program) 
HHSD 24/7 Intakes N/A 25 40 90.0% 95.0% 
 
Program Referrals/ 
Graduates 
CAO Alternatives to 
Incarceration 
420/22 300/20 250/14 175/15 200/25  
Linkages to psychiatric 
urgent care or hospitalization 
Police County DMH 
Clinicians 
101 178 260 N/A 2 N/A 2  
Mental health crisis 
evaluations conducted 
Police County DMH 
Clinicians 
187 253 314 N/A 2 N/A 2  
Homeless Liaison Program 
(HLP) T eam documented 
contacts/advisals for 
appropriate services 
Police  HLP 1,308 1,367 1,422 N/A 2 N/A 2 
 
HLP Citations Police  HLP 226 154 236 N/A 3 N/A 3  
HLP Mental Health 
Evaluations/5150 
Police  HLP 189 204 218 N/A 2 N/A 2  
HLP Calls for service handled Police HLP 2,472 2,799 3,134 N/A 2  N/A 2  
 
 
PILLAR 4: REGIONAL CAP ACITY 
 
Performance Measure Department Operational Area FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
Target 
FY26/27 
Target   
Regional coordination 
through shared investments 
(projects/grant awards) to 
the City 
HHSD Various 
 
$337,500 $373,125 $373,125 $1,291,507 $1,291,507 
 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 47 =====

40
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
4 Cases clearance rate was updated to include INACTIVE cases, which mirrors the methodology used by the Department of Justice. 
This benchmark is consistent with other agencies. 
5 The 90th percentile response time is a stronger metric than the previously utilized compliance percentage because it better 
represents the community's true emergency response experience, accounts for variability, and ensures a more accurate and 
consistent measure of performance. 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
Cases cleared by Criminal 
Investigations 4 
Police Public Safety 73.9% 70.0% 25.4% 30.0% 30.0% 
Crimes Against Person 
(Group “A” Offenses) 
Police Public Safety  4,755  4,846  1,227   N/A   N/A  
Crimes Against Property 
(Group “A” Offenses) 
Police Public Safety 3,261 3,861 5,669 N/A N/A 
Crimes Against Society 
(Group “A” Offenses) 
Police Public Safety   N/A   N/A  1,034   N/A   N/A  
Priority 1 Calls for Service - 
average response time 
(mins) 
Police Public Safety 8.3  11.0  6.9  7.0  7.0  
Animal Control Officers 
administrative citations 
issued 
Police Public Safety 162 78 160 300 300 
T otal Response Time for 
First Arriving Unit to Fire & 
EMS Incidents (90th 
Percentile) 5 
Fire Public Safety 7:33 7:52 7:47 6:00  6:00  
Percent structure fires 
confined to area/room of 
origin 
Fire Public Safety  68.4% 68.5% 65.0% 80.0% 80.0% 
T otal emergency 
responses 
Fire Public Safety 18,118  17,692  18,000  18,000  18,000  
Emergency Medical 
Service responses 
Fire Public Safety 12,427  11,988  12,300 12,300 12,300 
T otal Life and Safety 
Inspections 
completed 
Fire Public Safety 4,943  6,338  7,600  7,600  7,600  
Percentage of mandated 
inspections completed 
Fire Public Safety  100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
Percentage of 911 calls 
answered within 15 
seconds 
CMO Public Safety 94.0% 96.0% 96.5% 96.0% 96.0% 
T otal 911 calls answered by 
OEM dispatchers 
CMO Public Safety  80,658 79,317 88,600 80,000 78,000 
CLEAN STREETS & SAFE NEIGHBORHOODS 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 48 =====

41
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
6 Several projects were in design stage in FY 2023-24 and are being constructed in FY 2024-25. 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
T otal non-emergency 
calls answered by OEM 
dispatchers 
CMO Public Safety 125,630  136,944  140,000  135,000  135,000  
Onboard security 
incidents & complaints 
DoT Big Blue Bus 222 214 220 218 216 
Fatal and Severe Injury 
(FSI) crashes 
DoT Mobility 37  27  65  -  -  
Centerline miles paved 6 Public 
Works 
Engineering 
& Street Svcs 
3.40  0.90  1.02  0.93  2.92  
Sidewalk repairs (square 
feet) 
Public 
Works 
Engineering 
& Street Svcs 
49,816  19,800  54,294  28,300  33,880  
Linear feet of Water and 
Wastewater Mains 
replaced/rehabilitated 
Public 
Works 
Engineering 
& Street Svcs 
13,240  4,650  - 11,600 22,010  
Trees pruned Public 
Works 
Public 
Landscape 
5,289  5,320  5,200  5,200  5,300  
Trees removed/planted Public 
Works 
Public 
Landscape 
 325 / 84   333 / 312   260 / 198   200 / 175   200 / 175  
Code Enforcement cases 
opened 
CDD Code 
Enforcement 
1,118  1,942  2,101  2,200  2,300  
Code Enforcement cases 
closed 
CDD Code 
Enforcement 
1,361  1,676  2,644  1,700  1,800  
T otal square feet of 
community gardens 
Public 
Works 
Sustainability 
& 
Environment 
46,198  52,037  60,037  62,537  62,537  
Water conservation - 
maintain 20% water 
demand reduction 
Public 
Works 
Water 
Resources 
22.9% 24.1% 23.0% 23.0% 23.0% 
Fixed Route ridership DoT Big Blue Bus 7,741,258  8,602,196  10,150,000 10,500,000 11,000,000 
Number of projects that 
underwent a standard 
equity assessment 
process prior to reaching 
City Council (pilot year 
goal is 5) 
CMO Citywide  - - - 1  1.25  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 49 =====

42
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
Number of departments 
partnering with 
community connectors to 
develop/review proposals 
(pilot year goal is 5) 
CMO Citywide  - - - 1  2  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 50 =====

43
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
BBB On-Time-
Performance 
DoT Big Blue Bus 69.0% 69.0% 70.0% 70.0% 70.0% 
Aquatics users RAD Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
153,715  162,528  163,000  163,000  163,000  
Recreation class & camp 
participants 
RAD Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
7,491 7,250 7,200 7,250 7,300 
Membership visits to 
COVE skate park and 
Memorial Park Gym 
RAD Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
42,001  45,920  45,000  45,250  45,500  
T ennis reservations RAD Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
15,388 15,505 15,000 15,000 15,000 
Hours of field/track 
permits 
RAD Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
37,778  31,958  37,500  38,000  38,000  
Community events RAD Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
ACBH/20 + 
CRD/155 
CRD/199 ACBH/22 + 
CRD/185 
ACBH 25 +  
CRD/180 
ACBH 25 +  
CRD/190 
Visits to the Annenberg 
Community Beach 
House 
RAD Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
261,358  250,000  245,000  270,000  280,000  
ECONOMIC GROWTH & OPPORTUNITY 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 51 =====

44
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
7 Human Services Grants Program (HSGP). 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
Items Circulated Library Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
821,116  886,197  442,270  895,000  895,000  
In-person Visits to 
Libraries 
Library Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
223,876 310,576 220,415 350,000 350,000 
T otal Cardholders 
Registered and Renewed 
Library Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
14,365  18,085  12,357  19,500  19,500  
Adult and Y outh & Family 
Program participants 
Library Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
11,801 17,648 11,030 18,500 18,500 
Open+ Visitors (based on 
logins) 
Library Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
6,368  9,047  6,682  9,750  9,750  
Meeting room 
reservations 
Library Community 
& Cultural 
Amenities 
and 
Programs 
103 130 106 150 150 
Art of Recovery Projects 
completed or initiated 
RAD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
23 27 41 45 50 
Santa Monica 
Participants served 
through the HSGP7 
HHSD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
30,183 26,409 25,500 25,500 25,500 
Awarded HSGP funding 
to serve seniors, people 
with disabilities, people 
experiencing 
homelessness, youth and 
families, and other 
vulnerable populations 
HHSD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
 $8,038,641  $10,145,594   $10,103,996  $10,103,996   $ 10,103,996  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 52 =====

45
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
Santa Monica youth ages 
5-17 served by PAL, V AP
and CREST 
HHSD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
1,852 2,024 2,300 2,500 2,700 
Public computer usage 
(by session) 
Library Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
19,053  28,860  19,453  30,200  30,200  
Study Room 
Reservations 
Library Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
7,014 9,946 6,991 10,200 10,200 
New Business License 
applications 
Finance Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
2,398 2,453 2,714 2,795 2,879 
Businesses recorded as 
having closed (per 
business license data) 
Finance Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
1,665  926  1,665  1,669  1,672  
Parklets and outdoor 
dining spaces made 
permanent/licensed 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
90 100 100 100 100 
Agricultural sales at the 
Santa Monica Farmers 
Markets 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
$22,889,446  $24,764,560  $24,000,000  $24,900,000  $25,200,000  
CalFresh and EBT sales 
at the Santa Monica 
Farmers Markets 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
 $178,347   $166,906   $145,290   $135,000   $120,000  
Number of total building 
permit applications 
received 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
3,689 4,811 2,880 3,831 4,000 
Number of building 
permits issued 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
2,676  3,278  2,248  2,990  3,000  
Number of building 
inspections performed 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
16,152 18,153 12,540 17,000 18,000 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 53 =====

46
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
8 Trainings were temporarily put on hold to focus resources on the development of the Citywide Equity Plan. Trainings resumed 
in the Spring of 2025. 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
Percent of first round 
plan check submittals 
reviewed by due date 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
14.0% 43.0% 41.6% 45.0% 50.0% 
Number of visitors to 
Santa Monica per Santa 
Monica Travel & T ourism 
(SMTT) annual economic 
impact report (based on 
calendar year) 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
5.3 million 4.6 million 4 million 4.6 million 5 million 
Summer (July) average 
number of pedestrians 
on the Third Street 
Promenade 
CDD Economic 
Recovery & 
Opportunity 
503,441  520,321  438,811  500,000  520,000  
Percent of departments 
that participated in the 
Santa Monica Mentoring 
Initiative 
CMO Citywide 71.0% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
Percent of staff trained in 
Interrupting 
Microaggressions course 
CMO Citywide 12.0% 13.0% 25.0% 75.0% 100% 
Percent of departments 
trained in Implicit Bias 
course 8 
CMO Citywide 45.0% 45.0% 45.0% 75.0% 100% 
Equity performance 
evaluations adopted by 
each union  
CMO Citywide 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 100% 100% 
Number of departments 
that participated in the 
Racial Equity Committee 
for the full year 
CMO Citywide 13  15  14  15  15  
Number of departments 
accessing the language 
access fund for 
translation and 
interpretation  
CMO Citywide 5  7  8  10  10  
95% on-time reviews for 
construction and 
demolition permit 
applications 
Public 
Works 
Resource 
Recovery & 
Recycling  
95% 95% 95% 
Pounds of organics 
collected, recycled, and 
diverted from the landfill 
Public 
Works 
Resource 
Recovery & 
Recycling  
28,000,000  28,025,000  28,050,000  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 54 =====

47
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
PRIORITY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
9 The City requires 100% of new municipal buildings to achieve LEED gold or higher. 
Performance Measure Department Operational 
Area 
FY22/23  
Actuals 
FY23/24  
Actuals 
FY24/25  
Est. Actuals 
FY25/26  
T arget 
FY26/27 
T arget 
Clean Power Alliance 
participation rates in 
(customers enrolled in 
100% clean power) 
Public 
Works 
Sustainability 
& 
Environment 
95.9% 96.0% 95.8% 95.9% 96.0% 
Percent of new municipal 
buildings LEED Gold or 
higher9 
Public 
Works 
Sustainability 
& 
Environment 
100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
Percent of the City Fleet 
vehicles using alternative 
fuels 
Public 
Works 
Sustainability 
& 
Environment 
59.0% 61.0% 61.0% 65.0% 70.0% 
New public electric 
vehicle chargers installed 
(municipal only) 
Public 
Works 
Sustainability 
& 
Environment 
14  17  15  62    -  
Cumulative number of 
EV chargers citywide 
Public 
Works 
Sustainability 
& 
Environment 
206  261  276  338  338  
Stormwater capture Public 
Works 
Water 
Resources 
 18.2 million 
gallons 
28.0 million 
gallons 
 10 million 
gallons 
 10 million 
gallons 
 10 million 
gallons 
Re-establishing Transit 
Service Levels to 90% of 
Pre-COVID levels 
(473,000 hours) 
DoT Big Blue Bus 410,707 439,000  451,000  462,000  473,000  
BBB Passengers/ 
Revenue Hour 
DoT Big Blue Bus 19  20  23  23  23  
T otal Parking 
Occupancy/ 
Transactions 
DoT Parking  12.9 million   12.9 million   12.4 million   12.9 million   13.0 million  
Percent of phase 1 equity 
plan projects completed  
CMO Citywide 50.0% 100.0% 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PRiORiTY-FOCUSED PERFORMANCE MEASURES


===== PAGE 55 =====

48
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS
CITY MANAGER'S OFFICE
Council Priority: Affordable, Livable and Secure Housing for All   
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Homeless Outreach 
Campaign
in conjunction with the Homelessness Strategic Plan, develop and 
implement communications plan to help educate the community on 
the issues and strategies to addressing homelessness.
6/30/26
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
911 Dispatcher Cross-
Training
Design and provide new cross-training for existing public safety 
dispatchers, including the use of standardized guidecards for Police, 
Fire, and emergency medical dispatch call taking and the cross-
training of staff in all six dispatching skillsets (Primary Police Radio, 
Secondary Police Radio, Police Call Taking, Fire Radio, Fire Call Taking, 
Emergency Medical Dispatch).
12/31/26
911 Dispatcher Quality 
Assurance
implement enhanced training for existing public safety dispatchers, 
including the use of standardized guidecards for Police, Fire, and 
emergency medical dispatch call taking and the cross-training of 
staff without all dispatching skillsets.
12/31/25
All-Hazards Mitigation Plan Update federally-mandated hazard review and action plan to identify 
citywide priorities to reduce disaster risk. Complete grant-funded 
appendix to plan providing a social vulnerability analysis in relation 
to the hazards/information presented in the Local Hazard Mitigation 
Plan. 
8/31/26
Crisis Communications Emergency communications (such as the recent Palisades Fire) 
in coordination with the Emergency Operations Center; strategic 
communications and messaging on controversial, challenging and 
significant topics facing the city.
6/30/26
Damage Assessment Plan Create citywide damage assessment plan to guide City response 
after major disaster.
8/31/25
Emergency Phone System 
Replacement
Evaluate Next Generation 911 phone systems and work with Cal OES 
to develop an implementation plan to upgrade the city's 911 and 
non-emergency phone intake technology.
6/30/26


===== PAGE 56 =====

49
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Assess film permit process 
and policies to ensure 
efficiency and consider 
revising film permit policies 
to simplify requirements for 
permitees (e.g., requiring 
a smaller % of neighbor 
approval) and to find new 
revenue opportunities (e.g., 
requiring permits for filming 
on private property)
Revised policy and updated fee schedule approved by Council 12/30/2025
Economic Growth Campaign implement strategic communications campaign with both paid 
and earned placements (including blogs, social media posts, 
collaborations with partners and influencers) to show that Santa 
Monica is fun, clean and safe place to live, work and play.
6/30/2026
Grant Opportunity Tracking Monitor opportunities for state &federal grants that could support 
City projects & programs, in coordination with City’s state and 
federal lobbyists. Coordinates w/ City departments on identification 
of desirable grants & ensuring necessary support to prepare &submit 
grant applications as appropriate.
6/30/2026
Procure a contractor to 
broker naming rights, 
sponsorships, and licensing 
opportunities.
Contract award 12/31/2025
State and Federal Legislative 
Advocacy
Advocating for policy priorities and funding in line with Council-
adopted state and federal legislative platforms, provide regular 
updates to Council.
6/30/2026


===== PAGE 57 =====

50
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
311 Communications improved resident experience by updating system generated 
responses, staff close out notes and streamlines procedures.
6/30/2026
311 Customer Service 
Enhancements
implement system improvements and develop  mobile app to 
support all city services.
6/30/2026
Agenda + Meeting 
Management Software 
implement new templates on new system to incorporate information 
items and other documents.
6/30/2026
Broadcast public meetings 
on YouTube and Channel 16, 
and provide video production 
support for select priority 
topics.
Airing of Public Meetings and posting on YouTube  6/30/2026
City Tv transition, rebuild inventory all equipment, move out of 19th Street studio (declared 
surplus land), identify alternative location and storage, design and 
build a new studio that meets current video needs.
6/30/2026
Congressionally Directed 
Funding Requests 
Develop a streamlined process for evaluating and submitting 
requests. 
6/30/2026
Contracts management Manage contracts for citywide tools including: Digital Asset 
Management software (Bynder), newsletter software (MailChimp) 
social media scheduler (HootSuite), social media archiving 
(CivicPlus), graphics software (Canva), media aggregator (Cision), 
meeting captioning (National Captioning institute)
6/30/2026
improved Communication 
with Council in regards 
to legislation and event 
preparation.
improvements will center on regular communications regarding staff 
interactions with state and federal lobbyists; individualized attention 
from staff to each council member while remaining within context of 
Council priorities; working closely with council members in regards 
to legislative processes and utilizing inter-agency/inter-jurisdictional 
collaboration to achieve Council priorities.
6/30/2026
Palisades  Reimbursement Submit all Palisades Fire reimbursement requests to FEMA. Facilitate 
all CalOES/FEMA requests for information on previously submitted 
project.
6/30/2026
Palisades Fire After Action 
Report
Facilitate independent consultant to complete after action review of 
city's response to Palisades Fire incident.
12/31/2025
Provide information to the 
City workforce through 
monthly all staff newsletters.
Monthly All Staff Emails, special City Manager messages 6/30/2026
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 58 =====

51
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Provide media training to 
new Council members and 
City leadership.
Training conducted. 6/30/2026
Shared identity and 
marketing 
Oversee citywide style guide and tone of voice guidelines, increase 
cohesion in design across city departments by implementing 
enterprise-wide systems, templates and guides
6/30/2026
Organizational Value: Racial Justice, Equity and Social Diversity  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Cultural Celebrations Providing resources and logistical/communications support to 
staff groups planning cultural celebrations for organization and 
community; target of 4 major celebrations per fiscal year
6/30/2026
Department Equity Project Develop a department equity project. 6/30/2026
Equity Trainings Provide trainings on implicit bias, microaggressions, bystander 
intervention, and resilience to staff, community and council members
6/30/2026
Large Project Equity 
Assessments
The DEi team will conduct a comprehensive equity assessment of 
2-3 large scale city projects per year and will provide reports as 
addendums to Council. identified projects include Airport Conversion 
and Cannabis Social Equity
6/30/2026
Racial Equity Committee 
(EiOs)
Facilitating third cohort of departmental EiOs to advance 
department-specific equity and inclusion projects
9/30/2026
Reparations Program 
Creation
Development of a repararations program for Santa Monica based on 
specific harms, which will include harm benchmarks and restorative 
acts including financial compensation  and policy actions
3/30/2027
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 59 =====

52
Organizational Value: Sustainable and Connected Community  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Coordinated citywide 
messaging and 
communications
Centralize external city communications across departments to 
ensure unified and consistent messaging and tone of voice. Bring 
together representatives from each department regularly to ensure 
direct coordination and unity.
6/30/2026
Keep the community 
informed through press 
releases, blogs, SaMoNews, 
and social media.
Regular production of City news channels. 6/30/2026
Media relations Respond to numerous media inquiries, build relationships with 
local and regional media. implement targeted media outreach to 
tell Santa Monica's story to the community, including pitching in-
depth stories to regional publications, submitting content for local 
newspapers and publishing city content.
6/30/2026
Social Media Monitor and keep up with the latest trends in social media as a key 
way to reach the community and market the city to visitors. Grow the 
city's followers on and engagement with city social media platforms.
6/30/2026
State of the City Plan and execute annual State of the City event. 6/30/2026
Strategic Communications implementation of  strategies to tell the City's story to the 
community.  Meet monthly with key department leaders to 
align around priorities and maintain open, cross-departmental 
communication channels. 
6/30/2026
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 60 =====

53
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Administration of the Seismic 
Retrofit program.
Continued implementation of the Seismic Retrofit Program. Program 
deadline of November 2025 to submit plans to City for all building 
types except for steel moment frame (2035) and non-ductile concrete 
building types (2027). implementation of grant program to assist 
property owners of certain soft-story buildings with engineering, 
design, and retrofit costs, (funded with FEMA grant funding) in mid 
2024.
6/30/2027
Adoption of 2025 California 
Building Code
Regular production of City news channels. 12/31/2025
Downtown SM Farmers 
Market Traffic Control Plan + 
equipment modernization.
Staff have submitted a CiP request to replace anticipated Traffic 
Control Plan (TCP) equipment for the Downtown SM Farmers 
Markets.  Farmers Market team is working with Public Works 
Engineers and Transportation Team to review replacement options 
and finalize design build for Phase i and identify funding to complete 
this project.
6/30/2028
Safety Element 
implementation - Fire 
Resistance Zone
Create zone north of San vicente Boulevard implementing building 
code requirements.
12/31/2025
Updated Noise Ordinance Update noise ordinance, including preparation of proposed changes 
with City Attorney's Office, Police Department and other relevant City 
departments; updated enforcement processes will follow.
6/30/2026
Updated Pedicab 
Enforcement
Update pedicab ordinance, including preparation of proposed 
changes with the City Attorney's Office and Department of 
Transpiration; updated enforcement processes will follow.
12/31/2025
vacant Property Part 1: 
Create and implement a 
Registration Program
Develop and implement an ordinance creating a vacant Property 
Registration Program.
9/30/2025
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 61 =====

54
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Advanced Planning Effort: 
Local Coastal Program 
Update Land Use Plan.
Publish revised draft LUP . Since withdrawal of the 2018 final 
draft LUP for Coastal Commission certification in December 2020, 
significant policy differences remain.  Staff has restarted the LUP 
update and is working through outstanding issues with Coastal 
Commission.  Anticipate public review draft to circulate July 2025.
7/31/2026
Assist Boston Properties 
with planning for strategic 
changes to Airport Business 
Park to assist with business 
retainment
Consult with property owner to provide timely feedback on future 
work at the site, followed by timely review of proposals and 
applications.
6/30/2026
Bergamot Management and 
Leasing
Monitor property management, assist with activation of commercial 
spaces, facilitate future lease agreements.
6/30/2027
Development Agreement 
implementation
Design review and early plan check review of development 
agreements, specifically Miramar Hotel Project and Ocean Avenue 
Project, including amendments of Local Coastal Plan as necessary.
12/30/2027
Disposition of City Property Sale or lease of one or more city properties that are no longer 
required for city purposes or are underutilized and secure broker. 
6/30/2026
Economic Development 
Services and Network 
Building 
Formal program to engage city partners, including events and 
resources targeted to brokers, property owners, existing businesses, 
and interested businesses looking for new space with emphasis on 
business attraction, retention and expansion.
6/30/2026
Economic Development 
Strategic Plan
Develop strategic plan for Economic Development including realistic 
and attainable goals using staff and external resources.
7/30/2025
Economic recovery/stimulus 
programming plan launch 
and implementation
initiate 15-20  programs aimed at economic recovery and long-term 
sustainability.
12/31/2026
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 62 =====

55
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Ensure compliance with 
State Land Surplus Act 
requirements for all City-
owned properties
Coordinate efforts with Planning- submit annual HCD Audit.  Proceed 
with required noticing for surplus properties.   Complete Surplus 
Land Act process for Former Fire Station No 1.
12/31/25
Entertainment Zone on Third 
Street Promenade 
Following 2025 update to the Zoning Ordinance to enable an 
Entertainment Zone; work with DTSM and other departments 
to implement Entertainment Zones, including development of 
administrative guidelines and 3 pilot events 
1/31/26
implement new permitting 
and land management 
technology
Replace legacy systems with next generation technology solutions 
to improve efficiency of permit processes related to residential and 
small business applications, consistent with Moss Adams Permitting 
Efficiency Study. A short list of vendors have been identified as part 
of RFP process.
4/30/26
implement Small Business 
Support Program
Administer annual CDBG grant program starting with Pico Blvd 
Facade improvement Program.  Continue to research and make 
recommendation for $100k General Fund program (loan vs. grant).  
Return to Council to authorize expenditure of funds and approve 
contract with 3rd party funding administrator.
6/30/26
interdepartmental Economic 
Development Team
Establishment of regular meetings and workflows associated with 
critical members of City staff leadership.
12/31/26
Large-scale Signage Program 
Study Session
Provide Council information about large-scale signage program on 
the Third Street Promenade with legal and financial considerations 
and approaches for policy options.
12/31/25
Lead and participate in 
efforts related to the City's 
sidewalk and mobile vending 
program.
Establish stationary sidewalk vending program for Palisades Park. 
Update administrative rules and regulations and any necessary code 
amendments. Continue to monitor and pursue improvements to 
effectively enforce vending provisions.
12/31/25
Marketing and Branding 
for Economic Development 
initiatives
Creation of language/slogan, theme, identity and leveraging 
channels to distribute messages to support increased economic 
development efforts.
12/31/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 63 =====

56
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Pier and Oceanfront Walk 
Business improvement 
District
Evaluate the feasibility of creating a Pier/Oceanfront Walk BiD 
pending interest from the Pier + Ocean Front Walk businesses.
12/31/27
Pier Leasing Proceed with leasing Rusty’s through a broker. 12/31/25
Rand DA Termination/
Amendment & CCSP/ZO 
Amendments
Negotiations with RAND Corporation leading to vote by Council to 
terminate the Development Agreement, Civic Center Specific Plan 
Amendments, and possible zoning ordinance changes.
6/30/25
Sale City Property Proceed with sale of Apple building and CityTv sites through a 
broker. 
6/30/26
Santa Monica Civic 
Auditorium Redevelopment 
Enter into an Exclusive Negotiating Agreement with RPG Team to 
facilitate use and ground lease of the Santa Monica Civic Auditorium 
12/31/25
Santa Monica Place Digital 
Signage Development 
Agreement
Negotiate Development Agreement in preparation for Planning 
Commission recommendation and City Council public hearing.,
8/1/25
Self Certification Create pilot program to allow for select building projects to be 
permitted without City plan review if the plans are stamped by the 
appropriate licensed professional
8/31/25
Support DTSM Special 
initiatives
Assist with reviewing and negotiating agreements with Rooftop 
Cinema, 1318 4th St/Pickle Padle Paws and Lot 27 events; ensure 
monitoring of private security pilot program
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 64 =====

57
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Address Fractional 
Homeownership
Evaluate and develop recommendations to regulate fractional 
ownership of single-family homes and residential condominiums. 
Recommendations shall also include a review of best practices 
from similarly situated jurisdictions.  The initial work product would 
include research to understand scale of this problem in Santa 
Monica and to review best practices in other jurisdictions on possible 
regulatory framework.  
12/31/25
Administer the winddown 
of the Successor Agency to 
the former Redevelopment 
Agency including securing 
$14M in funding for FY 
2025-26
Administer the wind down of the Successor Agency, including 
preparing annual funding requests for Redevelopment Property 
Tax Trust Funds, to pay outstanding financial obligations of 
approximately $200 million, wire transfer requests to make payment, 
and submission of Proof of Payment and Prior Period Adjustment 
documentation. Last obligation will be paid in full in FY 2041-42.
4/30/26
Develop additional written 
policies, procedures 
and protocols for Code 
Enforcement efforts to 
address most common 
situations and circumstances; 
centralize these documents 
for greater access.
Library of reference material available to all Code Enforcement to 
increase consistency and efficacy.
9/30/25
Develop the workflows and 
implement the short-term 
rental housing permitting, tax 
collection, and enforcement 
software program.
implement new software to automate proactive enforcement or 
City’s policies related to short -term rental housing.
9/30/25
Zoning Ordinance 
Amendments to Ensure 
Consistency with State Laws 
Update the Zoning ordinance to comply with state legislative 
changes 
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 65 =====

58
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
implement recommendations 
of Landmarks Commission 
for social justice and equity 
in preservation
Develop training; community meetings; and seek diversity in historic 
preservation consultants
8/31/25
implementation of 
Recreational Cannabis 
Regulations
Following 2025 adoption of ordinance to allow  medicinal cannabis 
outlets to sell recreational cannabis, equity study to inform ordinance 
and regulations, and ordinance to allow new recreational cannabis 
retailers, implement program to license and monitor retailers.
9/30/25
Organizational Value: Sustainable and Connected Community  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Tree Removal Policy Develop policies that regulate tree removal as a result of new 
development including exploring replacement requirements as part 
of the development or on public property to protect and preserve 
the City’s tree canopy. in developing this policy, the City Manager is 
being asked to consider requiring three replacement trees for every 
tree removed.
7/31/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 66 =====

59
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Annual updates to the fees/
rates and fine schedules
Revisions to the existing fees/rates or fine schedules.  The schedules 
for the fees/rates are reviewed annually and increased based on 
a cost-of-living adjustment to ensure that the City recovers the 
appropriate cost for the service or if any new legislation impacts the 
existing fees/rates.  in addition, staff looks for new fees related to 
new programs or reevaluates existing fees to ensure that the cost 
to provide the service has not changed due to operational or legal 
considerations. Fines are updated as needed to ensure compliance 
with new programs, new violations, or new legislation.
6/30/2026
Business License Tax 
Modernization
To successfully implement Measure K which modernized the City's 
Business, Professions and Trades provisions. This includes database 
configuration, staff training, website updates and communication to 
the business community and  stakeholders.
12/31/2025
Comprehensive Cost 
Recovery Fee Study
in alignment with fiscal policies, conduct a comprehensive analysis 
of City costs and fees, to ensure the full costs of services provided 
by City Staff that benefit individual users rather than members of 
the community as a whole are recovered from those users. The City 
will calculate the cost of providing various recreational services and 
opportunities to individuals, and consider discounting those costs as 
appropriate, to ensure that individuals will be able to utilize these 
services and opportunities.
6/30/2026
Cost Savings Program Reduced expenses, increased buying power, improved efficiencies 6/30/2026
General Billings Feasibility 
Study 
The Revenue Division will research and determine feasibility of 
enhancing modern/convenience payment solutions for the public. 
Examples would be a "one-stop" location for all City payments and 
acceptance of non-traditional payment types such as venmo, Zelle, 
and possible crypto currency.
6/30/2027
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 67 =====

60
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Local Taxes and Licensing 
Software 
This project seeks to replace the software system currently used to 
administer, collect, monitor, report, and forecast Business License 
Tax revenues and expand the system to other significant City tax 
revenue streams such as Transient Occupancy Tax, Parking Facility 
Tax and Utility User Tax.  The purpose of this project is to decrease 
staff time, correct deficiencies (control issues in regard to manual 
checks and balances), decrease the potential for manual processing 
errors, facilitate timeliness of revenue collection and recording, 
enhance customer experience, and improve real-time compliance and 
management reporting, forecasting and monitoring.
12/31/2026
Midyear Operating Budget/
Five Year Forecast Review
Presentation of five year financial plan that evaluates current and 
future fiscal conditions to guide budget decisions, and adjustments 
to current year budget to reflect items of substantive impact based 
on new information and to fund critical items not funded as part of 
Adopted Budget if funding is available.
2/28/2026
Workers' Compensation Cost 
Containment
Review cost control programs to contain the City’s workers’ 
compensation costs. Reinvigorate existing and develop new workers' 
compensation cost control programs to counteract increased claim 
frequency and longer disability duration, particularly among the 
sworn personnel.
12/31/2025
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Annual audit and preparation 
of annual reporting 
requirements, including ACFR
This is required by City Charter and provides for continued AA rating, 
transparency, safeguard of assets and maintains citizens' confidence.
2/28/2026
Audit Subcommittee 
Administrative Support
Work with Chair to develop agenda for quarterly meetings: including 
presentation of the ACFR by the External Auditor, select Chair and 
vice-Chair, provide updates on progress of internal Audit report 
findings. Workplan includes Airport Property Management review, 
Joint Dispatch Review, and validation of progress made on Human 
Services Grants Program audit recommendations.
6/30/2026
Child Protection Officer 
Program Management
Annual review of Youth Programs to ensure compliance with 
requirements of the Ai.
8/31/2025
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 68 =====

61
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
increased Transparency 
Projects
Research and plan the implementation of a Popular Annual Financial 
Report (PAFR) and a Budget in Brief document for upcoming annual/
biennial processes.
6/30/2026
Labor Negotiations Plan, alongside the City Manager's Office and Human Resources, for 
the 2026 Labor Negotiation cycle.
6/30/2026
Liability Claims Review 
System
Continue quarterly analysis and review of liability claims to prepare 
plans addressing negative trends in the liability program and large 
liability claim settlements.
6/30/2026
Measure CS Committee 
support
Coordinate and provide administrative support to Measure CS 
advisory committee. Provide biannual status updates on projects 
funded with Measure CS funds. 
6/30/2026
Operating Budget 
Development and Adoption
Adoption of a balanced budget that reflects established Community 
and Council Priorities.
6/30/2026
Year-end Operating Budget 
Review
Report prior year budget performance, make prior year budget 
adjustments and make time-sensitive adjustments to current year 
budget resulting from grant fund updates, personnel actions and 
to reappropriate funds earmarked for projects that could not be 
completed prior to year-end.
10/31/2025
Organizational Value: Racial Justice, Equity and Social Diversity  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
implement recommendations 
from Availability Study
Encourage the participation of POC- and woman-owned businesses 
through various initiatives
6/30/2026
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 69 =====

62
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Ambulance Operator 
Program
Strategic Plan Objective 2A-1:  SMFD will identify seed monies 
to fund a two person BLS ambulance in July 2025. This will require a 
new class specification from HR and Personnel Board Approval. The 
program is a pilot to prove the estimated revenue available based 
on the experience other Fire Departments within LA and Orange 
Counties.
1/1/26
Apparatus Replacement Plan 
and related Fire Apparatus 
CiP
Strategic Plan Objective 2D-1:  Continue to request CiP funding in 
support of the Apparatus Replacement Plan. Finalize the replacement 
of Battalion 1, the Station #1 Utility vehicle, and the vehicle used for 
REMS deployments.
1/1/26
Community Risk Reduction 
Plan
Strategic Plan Objective 1B-1:  By July 1, 2025, engage the newly 
created CRR Action Plan as outlined in Objective 1B-1.
6/30/25
Fire Facilities Master Plan Strategic Plan Objective 2C-2 and 2C-3:  Continue to 
advocate for a stable and reliable Fire Facilities CiP for Fire Facility 
Maintenance in the 2026-2028 CiP period. Complete the Station #3 
HvAC Replacement Project.
7/1/25
Fund and Deploy an 
Advanced Provider Unit
Strategic Plan Objective 1C-1: With funding from the Parking 
Tax Measure, deploy a single, 40 hour ambulance staffed with a 
Firefighter / Paramedic and Nurse Practitioner. The goal of the unit is 
to provide a significantly enhanced scope of medical and outreach 
services to unhoused and at risk individuals within the City of Santa 
Monica.
1/1/26
Social Worker Strategic Plan Objective 2A-3: Renew the bid and contract for a 
20 hour per week case manager and social worker to assist with the 
reduction of 911 calls by high utilizers.
1/1/26
Standard of Coverage 
for Emergency Response 
Document
Strategic Plan Objective 2A-2 2A-3, 2-A4 and 3B-8: This meets a 
requirement for the Accreditation effort in FY 2025-26 and validates 
/ updates the response capabilities of the Fire Department.  
1/1/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 70 =====

63
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Fiscal Practices and Revenue 
Opportunities
Strategic Plan Objectives 4A-1 and 4B-2:  Employ fiscal best 
practices in all SMFD billing processes and explore potential revenue 
/ alternative funding avenues for SMFD.
6/30/26
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Administrative Staffing Strategic Plan Objective 3B-3: With all vacancies filled within the 
Administrative Division of the Fire Department, refine all job duties 
to match both current and expected workloads. This includes a 
report to outline current and expected gaps within the Division and 
resource requirements to address those needs.
6/30/26
Continue succession planning 
efforts.
Strategic Plan Goal 3C-1 and 3C-2: Succession Planning efforts 
that ensure all Fire employees are trained in current department 
policies and have a thorough understanding of their operational 
practices.  Ensure 90% of fire employees are trained in industry best 
practices, OSHA requirements, and department policy updates. 
6/30/26
implement the Fire 
Department's Strategic Plan 
and pursue accreditation by 
the end of Fiscal Year 2024-
2025
Strategic Plan Objective 3B-5:  Multiple workplan objectives tie 
directly to the SMFD 2023-2028 Strategic Plan. SMFD will begin 
accreditation efforts in Q3 of 2025 with the hopes of achieving 
accreditation from the Center for Public Excellence in FY2025-26.
6/30/26
Mental health and wellness 
program
Strategic Plan Objective 3A-1 and 3B-2:  This includes the 
enhanced efforts to address employee mental health and wellness 
through a wide range of classes and benefits for all SMFD 
employees.
6/30/26
SMFD Website Strategic Plan Objectives 1A-2 - Explore opportunities to make 
alterations to the Fire Department's website including additional 
content
1/1/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 71 =====

64
Organizational Value: Racial Justice, Equity and Social Diversity  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
External Outreach Strategic Plan Objective 3C-5: Firefighter recruitment efforts 
focused on middle school through college outreach to educate and 
encourage students into fire service career pathways. This includes 
the establishment and continued support of a Fire Department 
Explorer Program.
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 72 =====

65
HOUSING AND HUMAN SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Affordable, Livable and Secure Housing for All   
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
1318 4th Street (PS3) Faciliate submission of funding applications and submit Part 58 for 
NEPA review.
6/30/26
1342 Berkeley St - HTF Loan Completion of construction and lease up 6/30/26
2033 virginia Ave - HTF Loan Begin relocation and construction/rehabilitation/next steps 12/30/25
City-Owned Sites RFP Complete RFP process for City-owned site(s) identified in the 
Housing Element and prioritized by Council.
6/30/26
Expand community access 
for support with vouchers 
and increase community 
knowledge regarding 
voucher programs.
Conduct monthly Housing led informational and listening sessions in 
the community on various voucher programs. Hold in-person office 
hours. 
6/30/26
Facilitate construction of 
housing on City-owned sites 
in accordance with Housing 
Element (Wilshire Sites)
Begin construction of affordable housing at 1217 Euclid Street and 
1211-1217 Fourteenth Street/1402 Wilshire Boulevard
6/30/26
Foster Youth voucher Pilot implement five (5) FYi vouchers from HUD for youth voucher 
program.  
12/31/25
HMST, C3, and SJC 
Multidisciplinary Teams 
(MDTs)
Provide people experiencing homelessness with supportive services, 
including  medical/mental/psychiatric/substance use services, and 
placement into interim and/or permanent housing.
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 73 =====

66
Council Priority: Affordable, Livable and Secure Housing for All   
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Homeless Outreach 
Coordination
Coordinate and organize our outreach teams to cover gaps/services 
7 days a week.
6/30/26
Homelessness Strategic Plan implement comprehensive, multi-year, citywide plan to address 
homelessness within the Four Pillars framework, and annually report 
on the City's ongoing interdepartmental efforts to advance those 
strategies.
6/30/30
Housing Trust Fund 
Guidelines and Allocation 
Plan 
Amend Housing Trust Fund Guidelines and develop recommendations 
for future use of Housing Trust Fund resources
6/30/26
Human Services Grants 
Program (HSGP) Flex Funds 
Provide households experiencing housing instability or economic 
insecurity with short-term financial assistance related to service plan 
goals, as referred by HSGP and other services providers.
6/30/26
implement Housing Stability 
vouchers
Connect 15 people experiencing homelessness to the Stability 
voucher Program and provide rental assistance to help them secure 
housing in Santa Monica.
12/31/25
Ocean Park villas 
Preservation
Execute agreement to preserve affordability of Ocean Park villas 8/30/25
Pathway Home Work with the County of Los Angeles Homeless initiative and The 
People Concern to fully utilize all 25 units for people experiencing 
homelessness in Santa Monica.
6/30/26
Preserving Our Diversity 
(POD)
Expand outreach to increase the number of low-income, long-term 
Senior renters served by the program to help them meet their basic 
needs and maintain housing. Outreach efforts will be enhanced 
through coordination with Rent Control and partnerships with 
community-serving organizations in the Pico Neighborhood. Staff 
will assess all eligibility criteria, and recommend changes if necessary 
to ensure full program enrollment.
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 74 =====

67
Council Priority: Affordable, Livable and Secure Housing for All   
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Renter Protections Select lead agencies to administer both Right to Counsel expansion 
(RTC) and Flexible Financial Assistance (FFA) programs. implement 
the programs to provide legal services to eligible Santa Monica 
renters and direct financial assistance to renters at risk of 
homelessness.
6/30/26
Right to Counsel Program Provide households facing eviction with housing legal assistance 
through existing contract with Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles. 
6/30/26
SAMOSHEL interim Housing 
Program 
Achieve and maintain full utilization of all 60 beds. 6/30/26
Therapeutic Transport Team 
(TTT)
Provide contractual oversight and coordination, develop 
recommendations to increase access and utilization of the resource, 
and make processes and collaboration amongst departments more 
efficient and streamlined.
6/30/26
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Behavioral Health Strategy - 
Adult Crisis & PEH
-implement expanded behavioral health crisis services for adults. 
 -Begin implementation of expanded regional crisis services on the 
Westside with the WSCCOG.
6/30/26
Behavioral Health Strategy - 
Youth & Families 
implement expanded behavioral health services for youth. 6/30/26
PAL Out of school time 
programs
Provide out-of-school time programming that supports youth 
development and family needs in an effort to bridge the gap 
between vulnerable youth and law enforcement.   Engage 309 youth 
ages 6-17 years in educational, leadership, and fitness classes at 
two sites (PAL Youth Center and PAL Fitness Gym.) Partner with local 
agencies/PD to leverage programming and ensure  programs are 
staffed in alignment with ratios set forth in the Ai on Child Protection 
and youth program capacity. 
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 75 =====

68
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
2023-27 Human Services 
Grants Program (HSGP)
Administer $10 million+ in City funding for safety net services to 
seniors, people with disabilities, people experiencing homelessness, 
youth and families, and other vulnerable populations. includes 
modifying three contracts per Council authority that incorporates 
over $1.68M in restricted funding to expand behavior services to 
youth through FY26/27. 
6/30/26
CREST Out of school time 
programs
Provide out-of-school time programming at seven SMMUSD 
elementary schools that supports youth development and family 
needs.  Onsite programming provides a seamless day for school-aged 
students to participate in on-site programs.  CREST will engage 1500 
youth ages 5-11 years in cultural enrichment, physical activities and 
STEAM classes.  CREST offers options for families in need of after 
school care up until 6PM. Continue to ensure  programs are staffed 
in alignment with ratios set forth in the Ai on Child Protection and 
youth program capacity. 
6/30/26
vAP Out of school time 
programs
Provide out-of-school time programming that supports well-being 
of youth and families within the Pico neighborhood.  Engage 342 
duplicated youth ages 6-17 years in academic, art, and recreational 
enrichment.  Collaborate with community organizations to offer 
academic support, skill development workshops, and mentorship. 
Continue to ensure  programs are staffed in alignment with ratios set 
forth in the Ai on Child Protection and youth program capacity. 
6/30/26
virginia Avenue Park (vAP) 
Commercial Kitchen
The vAP Kitchen will support economic recovery and will 
provide local culinary entrepreneurs the ability to start 
their own businesses and build personal wealth. PW is 
responsible for kitchen construction and EDD works with 
HHSD to formalize the MOU+PSA with a lease for use of City-
owned property with an operator for the commercial kitchen.                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                               
Key Milestones:                                                                                                                                       
Execute PSA for Kitchen Operations (EDD): July 2025 
Complete Kitchen Construction: July 2025                                                                                                                                             
Kitchen Opening (PW & HHS): Sept 2025                                            
Launch of food entrepreneur program (EDD): Oct 2025                  
12/31/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 76 =====

69
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Data Collection and 
Reporting
implement consistent interdepartmental data collection practices 
and establish process for regular internal and external reporting.
6/30/26
implement HUD Funding for 
CDBG/HOME/HOME-ARP
implement Council-approved 2025-26 CDBG/HOME Annual Action 
Plan;  Develop and submit the  2026-27 Annual Action Plan.
6/30/26
SMHA Annual/Administrative 
Plan Update
Recommendation to Housing Authority Board to approve FY 2026-27 
Public Housing Authority and Administrative Plans.
5/31/26
Organizational Value: Racial Justice, Equity and Social Diversity  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Develop and launch a 
citywide Aging and Disability 
Action Plan
Citywide Aging and Disability Action Plan approved by City Council. 9/30/25
Equity Plan & inclusion 
initiatives 
Make progress towards Equity Plan projects and increase access to 
community resources for all residents, especially those that have 
been historically marginalized
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 77 =====

70
HUMAN RESOURCES
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Citywide Classification Study Maintain the City’s classification plan to reduce redundancy, where 
possible, for the purpose of improving operational efficiency, 
ensuring appropriate equity, and simplifying career paths.
Ongoing  
Civil Service Rule Application 
and Reform
Modifications to the City's Municipal Code Ongoing  
Employee Offboarding Standardize and streamline the employee offboarding process to 
ensure all necessary departments are aware of employee separations 
and complete the tasks necessary to protect City assets.
12/31/25
Employee Onboarding  Conduct monthly staff onboarding meetings ; transition routine 
components of employee orientation to an online platform and 
leverage online new hire paperwork in order to utilize staff time 
more effectively.
12/31/25
Enterprise Risk Assessment Address the areas under HR's purview identified in the assessment 
as high risk: recruitment and retention, retirement and succession 
planning, compensation, talent management, employee morale, and 
union relationships.
6/30/26
Explore partnership with 
Santa Monica College on 
recruiting
Engage with SMC assist with City on recruiting and outreach efforts` Ongoing  
Learning and Organizational 
Development
Development of a cohesive more comprehensive approach to provide 
learning, organizational development and recognition opportunities 
to the employees. This approach will require additional long-term 
funding.
6/30/26
MOU Negotiations: 2025/26 Prepare for the negotiations by engaging with all the stakeholders, 
such as the Department Heads, CAO, CMO, and Finance.
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 78 =====

71
Organizational Value: Racial Justice, Equity and Social Diversity  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Employee Demographic 
Dashboard
Maintain a demographic dashboard. Ongoing  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 79 =====

72
INFORMATION SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Affordable, Livable and Secure Housing for All   
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Housing Human Services 
Dashboards
Create dashboards using homeless data from multiple departments 
into a single view. 
9/30/25
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Beach Bike Path 5G install 5G and fiber infrastructure along Beach Bike Path to support 
5G and public safety.
12/31/25
Cradlepoint Routers Upgrade Cradlepoint routers to the latest technology in SMPD 
vehicles to support AvL and CAD systems. 
9/30/25
GiS Environment Upgrade Leverage public safety data by moving the GiS environment to a CJiS 
compliant Oracle infrastructure and upgrade enterprise to the Gov 
Cloud.
9/30/25
Mobile Device Refresh 
Equipment Replacement 
Project
Refresh approximately 800 City Employee phones with newer 
devices before the manufacturer ends support. 
     Police: ~400 Mobile Devices refreshed by 6/30/25 
     Fire: 50-100 Mobile Devices refreshed by 7/31/26 
     Non-Safety Staff: ~350 Mobile Devices refreshed by 12/31/25
12/31/25
Network Switches: Firewall implement redundant firewalls to improve reliability and uptime of 
critical public safety systems.
8/31/25
Real-Time Crime Center Support implementation of Real Time Crime Center, including video 
management, data reporting, and GiS.
12/31/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 80 =====

73
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Real-Time Crime Center 
Dashboards/Reporting
Using data from the Real-Time Crime Center, create reports that help 
public safety identify trends in crime, report out statistics, and make 
data-driven decisions. 
12/31/25
Upgrade MAXviEW Traffic 
Control System
Upgraded traffic control technology allows City traffic engineers 
control and coordinate traffic signals remotely and in real time. 
Signalized intersections allow City staff to manage traffic patterns 
responsively to improve the safety of our streets for vehicles, 
bicyclists, and pedestrians,
6/30/26
vision Zero Dashboards Create dashboards using traffic data from multiple departments into 
a single view. 
10/31/25
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Permitting System 
Replacement
implement the new Clariti Permitting system to replace Accela. 
improving the permitting experience for both constituents and staff 
and optimize & solve issues we have with the current system and 
support economic recovery efforts by streamlining processes and 
eliminating overhead. 
2/28/26
Tech Week Support The City/iSD will be cosponsoring this year’s Tech Week/Open Street 
Fair on October 18th.  
10/19/25
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
AssetWorks Program implementation of the AssetWorks suite of applications which 
includes fuel management, vehicle telematic data, and capital asset 
planning. The features offered by AssetWorks' programs helps to 
replace legacy fleet management applications and hardware with 
more efficient, interactive, and communicative functionality for 
administering and operating the different systems and business 
processes involved in managing the City's fleet of vehicles.
7/31/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 81 =====

74
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
BBB Operator and vehicle 
Scheduling Systems 
Replacement
A competitive procurement process in Q2 of 2025 will lead to 
vendor selection and the start of implementation of a modernized 
scheduling system in Spring 2026. A modernized scheduling 
system offers BBB enhanced technology to optimize scheduling, 
route adjustments, and Motor Coach Operator work assignments, 
efficiencies which improve and streamline the transportation 
experience for members of the Santa Monica community.
12/31/26
Computer Equipment 
Replacement Project
By the end of FY 2026-27, approximately 2,000 end user devices 
will be refreshed, at a rate of 500 per fiscal year, leaving no end user 
device older than 4 years in the City's computer fleet. Even sooner, 
by 12/31/2025 all end user devices will be upgraded to Windows 11, 
ensuring cybersecurity and support for all City Employees on their 
work devices.
6/30/27
Cybersecurity Assessment 
and Remediation
Conduct vulnerability assessment and remediation on all City 
computers, networks, and business applications.
6/30/26
Data Center/Computer 
Room Air Conditioning 
and Mechanical System 
Replacement
To alleviate costly outages, reoccurring repairs, and ensure 
uninterrupted operation of the city’s server and network 
infrastructure, city’s main data center air conditioning and related 
mechanical systems must be replaced.  The current system is 15 years 
old and has exceeded it expected lifespan.  
6/30/26
Develop an Enterprise Search 
Solution
improve search functionality on the public facing website to support 
the significant increase in web traffic and efforts to streamline all 
city websites and services under santamonica.gov. The improved 
search functionality will allow users to easily find content across 
all service areas in a way that is user friendly for all including those 
using assistive technology and other ADA tools.
12/31/25
Executive Technology 
Dashboards
Create executive technology data dashboards to report on service 
requests, application support, and iT projects.
9/30/25
Laserfiche (PD) Upgrade of existing Laserfiche records system to the latest version 
to ensure proper record management in accordance with all legal 
requirements.
9/30/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 82 =====

75
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Modernize City Servers to 
2019 or Newer 
Several City applications are hosted in 2008 or 2012 servers that are 
no longer supported by Microsoft. This ongoing effort ensures city 
business applications are running on a current Microsoft supported 
operating system, with a monthly security patch update. 
 
25 servers shall be upgraded to a current supported Windows 
operating system between 7/1/25 - 6/30/26
6/30/26
Operationalize Technology 
Governance
Create a model for funding, evaluating, and implementing 
technology and establish a mechanism for centralizing technology 
contract management, streamlining of duplicate systems to 
enterprise solutions, and creating transparency around open 
technology projects, status, and reports.
12/31/25
PCi Assessment Maintain the necessary documentation and controls to adhere with 
PCi Regulations. Provide evidence of adherence to the third-party PCi 
Assessor in order to receive the yearly compliance Attestation.
3/31/26
Review and Update 
Computer and Network 
Disaster Recovery Plan
Leverage a third party (best practice) to assist in reviewing and 
updating the City's Computer and Network Disaster Recovery Plan. 
Regular updates of the Disaster Recovery Plan is a requirement for 
various regulations including PCi.
3/31/26
Review and Update of 
Cybersecurity incident 
Response Plan
Leverage a third party (best practice) to assist in reviewing and 
updating the Cybersecurity incident Response Plan. Regular 
update of the incident Response Plan is a requirement for various 
regulations including PCi.
3/31/26
Telephone System 
Modernization & Unified 
Communications
Modernize city’s telephone and customer contact center systems by 
transitioning to cloud-hosted unified communications platform that 
provides intuitive interface, resiliency, and integrated functionality to 
enhance customer experience for the public. 
6/30/26
Third Party Business Risk 
Assessment
Leverage a third party (best practice) to do a complete Business 
Risk Assessment. The outcome of the Assessment will be used to 
implement internal policies and procedures for ongoing internal 
assessments.
6/30/26
Upgrading Facilities 
Management System
Upgrade the legacy Facilities Management system to a more scalable 
application with the ability to integrate more functionality for the 
end users. This system will be able to communicate with enterprise 
systems to better improve facility maintenance’s business process 
including integration with the City's 311 call center system and the 
City's financial system. The upgraded system will include predictive 
maintenance, native mobile app, and hosting by vendor. 
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 83 =====

76
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Water Resources Network 
and Server infrastructure 
Upgrades
Project is to upgrade the Water Resource Facilities existing 
unmanaged network switches to managed, upgrade SCADA rack 
servers, implement Active Directory for the SCADA Network, and set 
up a cellular data backup for communications between sites over 
the SCADA Network. This initiative will allow for the redundancy and 
modernization of communications that the Water Facilities needs for 
better operational support. 
6/30/26
Organizational Value: Sustainable and Connected Community  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
BBB Bus Yard Electrification Partner with SMDOT to lay a new power grid and install fiber 
throughout the BBB Yards to provide high speed network 
connectivity for the most modern, evolving, and future transportation 
industry technology applications and operations, including, but 
not limited to including bus telematics and centralized mobile 
surveillance systems.
12/31/29
BBB Wireless Network 
Hardware Refresh
Modernize SMDOT bus yard (exterior) and BBB facilities (interior) 
Wi-Fi infrastructure to enable next generation wireless applications, 
including bus telematics, centralized mobile surveillance systems. 
12/31/25
Reimagine Community 
Broadband Program
Review and update services offered and fee structures for the 
Community Broadband Program.
12/31/25
Website Development and 
Migration
Complete migration of Big Blue Bus and Council, and other legacy 
web content.
5/31/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 84 =====

77
LIBRARY DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Advance Community 
Mapping
Continue implementing the Community Mapping initiative, 
incorporating quantitative and qualitative surveys, facilitated focus 
groups, one-to-one interviews, and other methods of engagement to 
identify community needs and aspirations.
12/31/25
Collaboration with the 
Recreation and Arts 
Department
Partner with the Recreation and Arts Department (RAD) to activate 
library spaces with recreational and artistic programs that serve as 
community gathering points. 
6/30/26
Enhance Safety and Security 
in Library Spaces
Work with the Santa Monica Police Department (SMPD) and the City 
Attorney’s Office (CAO) to maintain staff and community safety in 
library spaces, enforce Library Rules of Conduct, and provide ongoing 
safety training for staff.
6/30/26
Expand Access to the 
Branches
increase accessibility and engagement at neighborhood branch 
locations by enhancing activation efforts and connecting patrons to 
library programs and services. 
6/30/26
Expand Literacy Programs Expand literacy programs under the Literacy Education for Adults 
and Families (LEAF) initiative, while advocating for continued 
funding through the California Library Literacy Services (CLLS) grants 
program.
6/30/26
Support Economic Recovery 
at the Libraries
Support the City’s efforts for economic recovery by exploring 
partnerships and developing programs focused on small business 
development and educational opportunities.
6/30/26
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
20th Anniversary of the Main 
Library Building
Celebrate the 20th anniversary of the current Main Library building, 
which opened in 2006. Recognize the library's rich history, from 
its beginnings in 1884 to its first dedicated building in 1904 and 
subsequent relocations. Plan events and exhibits that honor the 
library's legacy and its role in Santa Monica.
3/31/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 85 =====

78
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Co-Design with Microgrant 
Programs
Work with the Community Wellbeing Program to explore co-
designing and piloting microgrant programs with community 
members at library locations.
6/30/26
Develop New Library 
Collections
Develop new library collections to support visitors and cardholders, 
including a video game library and bike-repair kits.
6/30/26
Enhance Local History 
Collections
Collaborate with community members to enhance Local History 
collections and represent the Mexican American Presence in Santa 
Monica.
6/30/26
Expand Adult Events and 
Programming
increase the availability of adult events and programming at branch 
libraries by partnering with community organizations to meet the 
needs and interests of residents.
6/30/26
Main Library Café and 
Courtyard
Activate the Main Library Café and Courtyard spaces using 
placemaking design recommendations to transform the area into a 
vibrant, welcoming, and dynamic learning environment for library 
users.
6/30/26
Promote the value of SMPL Explore innovative ways to highlight the value of being a Santa 
Monica Public Library cardholder, including participation in 
community events and outreach opportunities.  
6/30/26
Strengthen Partnerships 
between the Library Board 
and Friends of the SMPL
Build and strengthen partnerships with the Friends of the Library 
Board and the Library Board to increase awareness of the Library’s 
services.
6/30/26
Upgrade Workspaces and 
Study Areas
Enhance workspaces, study rooms, and research areas with modern 
technology, accessibility features, and improved connectivity to 
better support library patrons.
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 86 =====

79
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Affordable, Livable and Secure Housing for All   
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Homeless Liaison Program # of homeless individuals referred to services 6/30/26
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Airport Security increase # of hours of checks along the perimeter 6/30/26
Crime Prevention Frequency of deployment of Mobile Command post 6/30/26
Crimes Against Persons 
investigations
Develop a baseline Case Clearance Rate 6/30/26
Downtown Patrol and 
Engagement
Crimes Against Property/Persons Crime Rate in Downtown 6/30/26
Engagement 90% of property crimes victims contacted within 7 business days 6/30/26
Leadership-Engagement-
Action-Discovery (LEAD) 
Program.
Continue to implement the LEAD Program (previously named 
"Juvenile Diversion Program") with a goal of a 90% program 
completion rate among juveniles referred to the Santa Monica Police 
Department.
6/30/26
Parks Patrol # of checks in the park 6/30/26
Police Patrol Average time to respond to priority 1 and 2 calls 6/30/26
Property and Evidence 
Management
Purge 300 items per month on a consistent basis 6/30/26
School Resource Officer 
Program
increase monthly visits to elementary and middle school campuses 
by 33%
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 87 =====

80
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Grant Program Manager Grant quarterly reports completed on time and successfully submit 
grant applications.
6/30/26
Recruitment and Background 
investigations
Decrease the amount of time taken to complete background 
investigations.
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 88 =====

81
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Airport Security and Camera 
system installation
Upgrade security and camera system installation that will allow the 
Airport to  maintain a secure environment for tenants and public.
6/30/26
Analyze RRR 311 
performance
identify gaps in the 311-RRR workflow to enhance customer service 
response time 
6/30/26
Audit and assess citywide 
solid waste collection routes
Solid waste collection routes that meet increasing community 
demands, strengthen RRR's operational readiness, and enhance route 
equity among drivers
6/30/26
Construction and 
implementation of Mobility 
active transportation 
projects utilizing grants, 
Transportation impact Fee 
(TiF), and local funding 
sources.  
Olympic Blvd Sidewalk improvements - This project creates a 
sidewalk along the north side of Olympic Blvd between Stewart St 
and 26th St and install pedestrian amenities to improve pedestrian 
safety access to the Metro E line 26th St/Bergamot Station. 
The project would improve linkages to public transportation, 
facilitate walking, and support a safer and barrier-free network 
where no sidewalk currently exists today. The project would also 
install pedestrian-oriented street lighting, implement drainage 
improvements, and install landscaping upgrades along the north side 
of Olympic.
12/31/25
Construction and 
implementation of Mobility 
active transportation 
projects utilizing grants, 
Transportation impact Fee 
(TiF), and local funding 
sources.  
Wilshire Boulevard (16th Street New Traffic Signal) Safety impd. The 
second phase of implementation of the Wilshire Boulevard Safety 
Study will install transportation safety improvements at seven high 
crash intersection locations on Wilshire Blvd. The Wilshire Blvd 
Safety Study identified these locations based on community input, 
adjacency to schools and parks, and amount of crash incidents. The 
project will advance the Council Framework Priority Clean and Safe 
Santa Monica by reducing crashes, significantly enhancing crossing 
conditions for people walking, and improving connections to bus 
service.
03/01/26
Construction and 
implementation of Mobility 
active transportation 
projects utilizing grants, 
Transportation impact Fee 
(TiF), and local funding 
sources.  
Stewart Street & Pennsylvania Ave Safety Enhancement Project . This 
project will construct the Stewart/Pennsylvania safety enhancements 
to create a protected bikeway along Stewart Street, add new 
pedestrian scale lighting, add a new sidewalk on Pennsylvania 
Avenue, and a new median at the Nebraska/Yale intersection. The 
project will enhance pedestrian and bicycle safety along the corridor, 
create a complete street, and allow people of all ages and abilities 
access to the street.
10/31/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 89 =====

82
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Construction and 
implementation of Mobility 
active transportation 
projects utilizing grants, 
Transportation impact Fee 
(TiF), and local funding 
sources.  
Safe Route to Schools: Six Schools . The Project will  implement 
design and construction of school access and safety improvements 
near Edison Language Academy, SMASH, John Muir, McKinley 
Elementary, Grant Elementary and Franklin Elementary that were 
identified during Walk Audits conducted in the spring of 2017.  The 
crossing improvements include, bulb-outs, high-visibility beacons, 
curb ramp improvements, signage and striping, and operational 
changes to these schools. The improvements also remove crossing 
barriers and provide improved visibility and legibility for students 
and parents, making active transportation more comfortable for 
students and their families.
09/30/26
Electric vehicle Charging 
infrastructure
Reduce station downtime by  improving operation and maintenance 
response time for existing electric vehicle charging infrastructure. 
06/30/26
Manage Landfill Gas System 
at City Yards
Monitor, assess if critical systems need to be replaced, and report on 
the LFG system to manage methane at the City Yards.
06/30/26
Moss Avenue Pump Station 
improvements
Upgrade and rehabilitate the existing wastewater lift station to 
enhance reliability and resiliency for continued wastewater collection 
and pumping of the City's wastewater.
06/30/28
Replace Pier Bridge before 
2028 Olympics.
Resilient and seismic ready infrastructure. 
Obtain all permits by Spring 2025. 
Bid Project in Spring.  
Award Project in Summer/Fall.  
Start Construction by end of 2027. 
Complete by end of 2027.
01/01/28
Return recyclables tipping 
and transferring services to 
the City Yards
Enhance collection reliability, improve response time, and reduce 
overtime by  eliminating the need to take recyclables to the Culver 
City Municipal Transfer Station.
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 90 =====

83
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Airport Conversion Planning This project is to determine the future of the Santa Monica Airport 
through robust community engagement and design/planning for 
anticipated closure after 12/31/2028. Five phases of work are 
occurring to determine a preferred scenario for the airport land. 
12/31/26
Preferred Scenario for the 
Airport Property
Complete phase three of the Santa Monica Airport Conversion 
project and identify a preferred scenario for the future use of the 
airport property.
12/31/26
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Assess feasibility of GO Bond 
for CiPs
Assess feasibility of GO Bond for CiPs. if poling shows favorable, add 
to ballot measures.
06/30/26
Cemetery and mausoleum 
projects to maintain facility.
Paint the mausoleum, repair all the stained glass windows, tree 
trimming, ivy installation around perimeter, and landscape projects 
to provide a dignified resting place.
06/30/26
Cemetery and mausoleum 
projects to maintain facility.
Paint the mausoleum, new niche section, tree trimming, and 
landscape projects to provide a dignified resting place.
06/30/26
Cemetery and mortuary 
software upgrade.
Upgrade to a new cemetery and mortuary software that will allow 
Woodlawn to use the software in upgraded computers, has proper 
accounting software, mapping ability, and record keeping.
10/31/25
FY 2026-28 Biennial CiP 
Budget
Coordinate and prepare the FY 2026-28 Biennial CiP Budget 06/30/26
Update Cemetery and 
Mortuary software.
Provide Woodlawn with updated cemetery and mortuary software 
that will meet iSD requirements, update accounting processes, 
transfer and store historical records, update mapping abilities, and 
track sales functions.
10/30/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 91 =====

84
Organizational Value: Sustainable and Connected Community  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
19th Street Open Space 
Project -Community Garden 
Program
Deliver a new community space at  2018 19th Street including 
community engagement and programming.
06/30/26
Beach Dune Restoration 
Project
installation of Phase 3 beach dunes 06/30/25
California Air Resource 
Board Advanced Clean Fleets 
regulatory compliance
Comply with the CARB ACF requirement of 100% zero emission 
vehicle purchases for medium-heavy duty vehicles.
1/1/27
Clean Power Alliance Achieve participation in Clean Power Alliance at or above 95% 06/30/26
Climate Action & Adaptation 
Planning
Adoption and implementation of a building performance standard 
for large existing buildings and a exiting building reach code for 
small and medium size buildings.
12/31/25
Five-Year Water and 
Wastewater Rate Study
Update and adopt water and wastewater rates for calendar years 
2025-2029 .   Study Session rescheduled to March 2025 and rate 
adoption anticipated in June 2025 for 2025-29 rates.
06/30/25
Groundwater recharge well 
(SM-11i) to support SWiP
Second groundwater well to replenish local groundwater aquifers 
with a drought resilient water supply.   
FY24/25 (complete well drilling) 
FY26/27 (complete well equipping)
12/31/26
Memorial Park improvements 
- Design Phase 1
Start design of Phase 1 of Memorial Park Redevelopment and 
Expansion Project  - 1/1/2025 
Complete Design/issue for Construction (iFC) Set - 6/30/2026
06/30/26
Replacement of Charnock 
Wells 13 and 18
increase production and resiliency of the City's local groundwater 
supply. 
Construct and equip two replacement groundwater wells. 
12/30/26
Single Use Plastic Ordinance Update the City of Santa Monica's Single Use Plastic Ordinance and 
relaunch education and enforcement efforts
06/30/26
Smart Water Meter (AMi) increase water use efficiency and reduce water loss:  (12/30/2023 
(initial test cases completed on schedule), 1/23/2024 - adopt AMi 
Opt-Out Fee 
6/30/2024 - complete 25% of installs (~5000 meters) ,12/31/2024 - 
complete 50% of installs 
12/30/2025 (final project completion). 
UPDATE - Project will be complete by end of March 2025 and ahead 
of schedule.
12/30/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 92 =====

85
Organizational Value: Sustainable and Connected Community  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Street Lighting 
Modernization and  Drainage 
improvement Projects.
Reduce city's energy consumption and improve drainage conditions 
while replenishing ground water aquifer with the completion of 
the design and construction of project.  Apply for grant funding to 
modernize lighting and add Electric vehicle charging stations in the 
Pico neighborhood.
06/30/28
Sustainable Advisory Team Launch Sustainable Advisory Team to improve integration of 
sustainable practices within CSM
06/30/26
Sustainable City Plan Collect and report on Sustainable City Plan data and progress toward 
Council adopted SCP goals, indicators, and targets.
06/30/26
Unleaded Aviation Gas 
(100R)
Transition from UL94 to 100R unleaded fuel at the city owned self-
serve fuel station in an effort to transition away from 100LL leaded 
fuel. 
6/30/26
Zero Waste Plan Update Adoption of the Zero Waste Plan Update and begin the 
implementation of some initiatives. 
6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 93 =====

86
RECREATION AND ARTS DEPARTMENT
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Reactivate Miles Memorial 
Playhouse 
The Miles Playhouse was reactivated last winter as part of a soft 
open while staff worked out all the kinks in operation of the 
facility into the spring for a summer reopen. Cultural Affairs staff 
look forward to bringing a whole new array of new Arts & Culture 
programming to the Playhouse as part of a new RFP process to 
hire program partners (iC) to provide high end arts and culture 
programming for the FY 25/26 school year. Netwatch security 
monitoring system went live this past winter as well bringing real-
time monitoring, and greater safety and security to the facility. A 
new permanent fence is slated to be installed this summer 2025 with 
programming to follow. 
10/1/25
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Citywide Banners Policy Evaluate and return with an ordinance and program to allow 
banners to be placed on City light poles supporting the arts and 
community cultural life of Santa Monica. The program should be 
designed as government speech, and allow for nonprofit submissions 
to promote arts and culture, pursuant to a program approved by 
the new Council. Program guidelines and details will be set forth 
in a resolution, with clear guidelines on the expressive action, such 
as government support and promotion of community-based artistic 
and cultural events and causes that serve civic and public interest. 
Council will adopt submissions by resolution, stating they reflect 
the views of the new Council. The City will maintain control and 
discretion over the selections and control installation. Staff will 
provide estimates of costs to the City for installation and program 
administration. 
12/30/25
Community Recreation 
Management Software 
Application
Effectively update, promote and implement a  cloud-based recreation 
management software to improve service delivery. Cultivate 
economic recovery & expand community & cultural offerings.
12/31/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 94 =====

87
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Cultural Grants – Art of 
Recovery model expanded to 
include microgrants
To increase reach of cultural funding, and ensure a quick turnaround 
from application to funding,  will launch a new Art of Recovery 
microgrants program expanding partnerships with Santa Monica 
communities, neighborhoods and arts producers who have not 
previously received an Art of Recovery grants. Microgrants are 
between $500 and $5,000 and Art projects must meet at least one 
of the following: Activate a park; Be a gathering, festival or event; or 
Activate a street.
6/30/25
Expand Community Aquatics 
programs and services
Expand and enhance recreational, educational, and enrichment 
aquatics programs, including additional programming and increased 
recreational and permittable swim hours at the Annenberg 
Community Beach House and the SAMOHi Pool. Continue offering 
American Red Cross public safety courses. Manage room rentals and 
birthday party bookings at the Swim Center (SMSC). Collaborate 
with the Santa Monica Aquatics Advisory Committee (SMAAC) to 
advocate for a new aquatics facility to meet increasing demand.
6/30/26
Frieze LA Art Fair at the 
Airport
RAD CAD and Airport teams, in collaboration with other City 
Divisions, successfully worked with Frieze LA to bring their 
international art fair to the Santa Monica Airport on February 20-22, 
2025. Despite ongoing impacts from the Palisades Fire and concern 
from organizers about the safety of Santa Monica, the City was able 
to support a highly successful fair event and connect the art fair to 
local artists and arts organizations in need of support and leveraged 
opportunities to expand the arts at both the Santa Monica Airport 
and beyond. The Frieze partnership also resulted in the addition of a 
new work by an emerging Southern California artist to the municipal 
Art Bank collection. A fourth year is launching Feb 19, 2026.
2/19/26
Grants Programs – maintain 
arts grants programs, 
eventually grow
Cultural Affairs continues to manage the existing 6 grantmaking 
programs, distributing a total of $904,694 to artists and 
organizations. Develop grants growth plan to increase reach to all 40 
arts and cultural organizations licensed to work in the City of Santa 
Monica – we currently fund 27 organizations, and applicants do not 
receive their total requests. Grants are a core program for cultural 
affairs, ensuring nonprofits and individual artists are able to continue 
working and serving the Santa Monica community.
6/30/26
LA 28 Practice venues Work with LA 28 and aquatics stakeholders on the possibility of 
LA 28 utilizing the Swim Center for a  practice venue for the 2028 
Olympics.
6/30/28
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 95 =====

88
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Major Events Policy in collaboration with our community partners, multiple departments 
and the Community Event Committee create a 'major events' policy 
for large scale events that do not qualify as Community Events or fit 
within the Community Event policy.
12/30/25
Reactivate Camera Obscura 
Art Lab 
RAD staff are working with CDD team at potential opportunities to 
bring greater economic vitality to the facility through public / private 
partnership with local businesses. 
6/30/26
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Code of Conduct 
Development Phase i 
RAD leadership will work with all divisions in the creation of a Code 
of Conduct for all Recreation and Arts facilities across the city. Much 
like the Library's Code of Conduct, the RAD Code of Conduct will 
establish appropriate community behavior to create welcoming 
community public spaces and help keep everyone - residents, visitors 
and staff members safe. in FY 25/26, RAD staff will plan, develop the 
policy and create a vision for implementation of the CoC. 
12/30/25
Code of conduct 
Development Phase ii 
in FY 25/26, RAD leadership hopes to adopt the RAD Code of 
Conduct and implement a support system necessary to maintain 
this facility policy in a sustainable way, like the Library Department's 
Code of Conduct. Please Note: the success of this Phase ii may 
require additional funding support for staffing (i.e. POS, ROS, Park 
Rangers, Facility or Park Monitors) to best monitor RAD facilities 
onsite and practically enforce the RAD CoC. 
6/30/26
Formation of the new 
Recreation & Arts 
Department (RAD)
Phase ii: Complete the formation of the new RAD - continue work 
toward formation of the new RAD throughout FY 24/25 as part of 
dept. strategic planning & citywide community engagement process.  
Key components of this work in this fiscal will include the following: 
community outreach efforts to help develop the new department's 
core values, mission & vision, and community engagement 
gatherings in Santa Monica's neighborhoods. 
12/30/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 96 =====

89
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Acknowledge + Reframe 
Together: Building equitable 
civic spaces through the arts 
- City Hall Murals PHASE ii
New artwork in historic City Hall lobby; new interpretive signage 
prominently displayed by Macdonald-Wright mural; curriculum about 
issues arising from Mural; survey of public art and commemorative 
landscape to form a baseline for future work ensuring public space 
reflects equity and belonging. For all other recommendations  CAD 
will work closely with Equity to create a timeline and identify 
resources for implementation.
12/30/29
Bay Street Beach Reframe Request of previous councilmembers that in the spirit of 
acknowledging Nick Gabaldon’s mixed heritage and to build 
intercultural solidarity, upon completion of Reframe: City Hall Murals, 
initiate a public art and community engagement Reframe project to 
commemorate the Historic Bay Street Beach site and its rich history 
of Black surfers, including Nick Gabaldon. in commemorating Nick 
Gabaldon, consideration will be given to creating a statue. The 
process will include engaging an artist to commemorate the Historic 
Bay Street Beach site’s history and people while creating a powerful 
acknowledgement of people of color who were pioneers in the sport 
of surfing. 
6/30/27
Equity, inclusion, and 
Diversity
Work with the city's Equity Office to continue to develop 
programming focused on supporting the city's equity goals. Develop 
projects and programs informed by the previously developed equity 
heat map and the city's upcoming equity plan. 
6/30/27
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 97 =====

90
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Bergamot Access Projects Complete construction of following three first-last mile pedestrian 
and bicycle safety improvements near and around Bergamot Metro 
E-line station which include: 
- Olympic Sidewalk – New sidewalk/ pedestrian improvements on 
the north side of Olympic from 26th St. to Stewart St. 
- 26th Street First/Last Mile Connection – Protected bike lanes 
on 26th from Broadway to Olympic Blvd., and new crosswalk at 
Olympic/26th St. 
- Stewart/Penn Safety Enhancements – Protected bike lanes on 
Stewart St. from Colorado Ave. to Kansas St., and new sidewalk/ 
pedestrian improvements on Pennsylvania Ave between 26th St. and 
Stewart St.
12/31/26
Bike Action Plan Amendment 
implementation: Broadway 
and Colorado Ave
Complete design and construction of protected bike lanes on 
Broadway from 5th St. to 26th St.; and a westbound protected bike 
lane on Colorado Ave from 17th St. to 5th St.
12/31/26
East Pico Safety Study Complete community engagement and planning process to 
address safety concerns on Pico Blvd between 28th St/Stewart 
St. and the eastern city limit. The project will result in the design 
and implementation of quick build pedestrian improvements that 
will offer community members an opportunity to experience the 
enhancements first-hand and provide feedback to City staff to ensure 
the long-term improvements meet the community’s needs and vision.
2/28/26
Santa Monica Boulevard 
Safety Study
Develop a community supported safety plan focused on Santa 
Monica Blvd from Ocean Ave to the eastern city limit, with specific 
recommendations for cost effective, data-driven, multi-modal safety 
measures and transit enhancements for Council adoption, immediate 
implementation, identification of future measures, and a clear plan 
for funding and implementation.
4/30/26
Six Schools Pedestrian 
improvements
Complete design and construction of identified pedestrian 
improvements at and around 6 schools in Santa Monica including 
McKinley, Grant, Franklin, Edison, and John Muir Elementary Schools 
and Santa Monica Alternative School House (SMASH).
12/31/25
Wilshire Safety Study 
implementation Phase 2
Complete design and construction of pedestrian safety improvements 
(including new curb ramps, curb extensions, upgraded lighting at 
six intersections located along Wilshire – at 18th Street, 21st Street, 
22nd Street, Chelsea Avenue, 25th Street, and Harvard Street. And 
new traffic signals will be installed 16th Street and Chelsea Avenue.
7/1/27


===== PAGE 98 =====

91
Council Priority: Clean Streets and Safe Neighborhoods  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Parking Structure License 
Plate Recognition (LPR) 
Expansion 
install LPR in all City owned parking structures and the pier deck 
parking lot. LPR exists as a pilot project in structures 4 and 5 and 
once a funding source is identified, it can be expanded to all other 
parking structures and the pier deck parking lot. This technology 
allows a better user experience at parking structures and allows the 
Police Department to utilize the camera system to find vehicles of 
interest.
6/30/27
Stair Resurfacing at Parking 
Structures 4 and 5
Resurface the entire staircases and landing areas at parking 
structures 4 and 5 to provide a modern, aesthetically pleasing 
parking structure, and enhance slip resistance and safety.
12/31/25
Repaving and Drainage 
Enhancements at Beach Lot 
8 North
Design and construct drainage enhancements and resurfacing for 
beach lot 8 north. Available budget will allow partial completion of 
needed repairs at this parking lot.
6/30/27
Council Priority: Economic Opportunity and Growth  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Parking Structure Advertising 
Program
Create and operate a parking advertising program on the interiors of 
parking structures to create a new revenue source for the City.
8/1/25
Parking Rate Restructuring 
and Coastal Commission 
Approval
Restructure parking rates citywide to enhance City revenue. 
Public oureach and engagement, Council approval, and Coastal 
Commission approval are required.
6/30/26
Parking Credit Card and 
Convenience Fee Pass Along
instead of absorbing the cost of processing credit cards and 
convenience fees for parking transactions, pass these fees along to 
customers.
6/30/27
Parking Meter expansion Expand parking meters to new locations to enhance City revenues. 9/30/25
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Moss Adams Audit / Parking 
Divisions Assessment 
implementation
Meet or exceed Finance Department expectations for implementation 
of recommendations, including providing ongoing and increased 
oversight of compliance with agreement requirements such as 
monitoring use of city parking cards, inventory of equipment and 
maintenance issues, monitoring of standard operating procedures, 
and ensuring that reporting and invoicing deadlines are met.
8/1/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 99 =====

92
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
Automated Bus Lane 
Enforcement (ABLE)
Cameras for bus lane and bus zone violation detection and 
enforcement installed and operating on 10 buses, issuing citations, 
and improving system reliability and safety.
12/31/25
Advance bus-enhancing 
infrastructure projects such 
as bus lanes, transit signal 
priority, transit centers, etc, 
in Santa Monica and Los 
Angeles
improvement of fixed route travel times and ridership - goal of 
installing 2 directional miles of bus only lanes by end of Summer 
2025.
6/30/26
Battery Electric Bus 
infrastructure Design, 
Permitting & Award
Complete 100% design (including the City's permitting process) of 
phases 2 - 4 of the battery electric bus infrastructure project and 
award construction contract.
8/1/25
Conduct and complete 
10 new hire Motor Coach 
Operator training classes
Recruit, hire and train 10 MCOT classes with anticipated class sizes 
of 8+ per class to address Motor Coach Operator shortage
12/30/25
implement amenity 
improvements (i.e.. seating, 
shade, real-time information, 
trees etc) at BBB stops
install new seating at 50 bus stops and 40 security lighting units at 
40 bus stops.
8/1/25
implement Transit Technology 
Roadmap  Customer 
Experience (CX) Systems 
Recommendations
Complete all recommended CX upgrades and procurements 
including SaaS solutions for real-time bus predictions, internal 
operational analytics, mobile ticketing, and Mobility as a Service 
(MaaS) initiatives.  
12/31/25
implement Transit Technology 
Roadmap Transit Planning, 
Safety, and Operations 
Systems Recommendations
Complete all recommended upgrades and procurements including 
CAD-AvL, vehicle and operator scheduling systems, timekeeping 
for Motor Coach Operators (MCOs), upgraded vehicle and Operator 
Scheduling System, Real-time information for customers, and others 
as recommended in the Roadmap.
6/30/26
increase BBB fixed route 
service levels to 90 percent 
of pre-pandemic levels
446K annualized service hours by May 2024 (85% of pre-pandemic 
levels); 473K annualized service hours by August 2025 (90% of pre-
pandemic levels)
8/1/25
Maintain schedule of three 
service changes throughout 
the year based on current 
conditions and Council-
adopted Service Standards.
Goal to achieve 21  passengers per revenue hour 6/30/26
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 100 =====

93
Organizational Value: Good Governance and Modernization  
Project or Activity Outcome/Deliverable
Target 
Completion 
Date
MCO Recruitment Continue recruitment and retention strategies and actively recruit to 
fill 25-30 vacant positions within the Department.
6/30/26
Zero-Emission Fleet / Battery 
Electric Bus Replacement 
Program
Negotiate a contract to procure 30 new 40' battery electric buses 
and issue a NTP .
9/30/25
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENT WORKPLANS


===== PAGE 101 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
SANTA MONiCA AT A GLANCE

===== PAGE 102 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
SANTA MONICA AT A GLANCE
94
Santa Monica: Populus Felix In Urbe Felici (Fortunate people in a fortunate place)
Santa Monica is a beautiful beachside community of 8.3 square miles, situated on the westside of Los Angeles 
County, about 16 miles from Downtown Los Angeles. 
i
t is bordered by the City of Los Angeles on three sides and 
the Pacific Ocean on the west.
HISTORIC TIMELINE
The city of Santa Monica sits on Tovaangar (Tongva for "the world"), which has been the home of the Tongva 
people since time immemorial. The area that we now call Santa Monica was first called “Kuruvungna” after 
the nearby natural springs; this remains as a sacred site to the Tongva peoples. Today, Santa Monica is home to 
a mix of commercial districts, residential communities, and recreation and arts venues. Each of Santa Monica’s 
character-rich neighborhoods – Pico, Wilshire Montana, Ocean Park, Downtown, Sunset Park, North of Montana, 
and Northeast – has a unique vibe. Recently named by National Geographic as one of the "Top 10 Beach Cities 
in the World" and by T
i
ME as one of the "Best Places to Live," Santa Monica features three miles of Pacific 
Ocean coastline, broad sandy beaches, and the iconic Santa Monica Pier. High-profile global technology and 
entertainment companies, small entrepreneurial start-ups, restaurants and retail businesses call the city home.
Santa Monica is a full-service city providing police, fire, emergency services, water, refuse and recycling, streets, 
parking, planning, building, engineering, free public Wi-Fi, a high-speed fiber optic network, parks, affordable 
housing, economic development, libraries, rent control, a regional transportation network, local access television 
channels, and recreational, cultural and educational services to the community.
1542 1769Time 
Immemorial 1828 1850 's 1875 1886 1893 1909
City named
“Santa
Monica.”
Tongva 
Peoples are 
the sole 
human 
inhabitants of 
what we now 
call Santa 
Monica.
Commercial
and tourism
opportunities
boom.
A mile-long 
wharf is built. 
The City serves 
as the major 
port of call for
Los Angeles
until 1903.
The City of
Santa Monica is
incorporated.
Juan Rodriguez 
Cabrillo drops 
anchor in Santa 
Monica Bay.
Area divided 
into Rancho San 
Vicente y Santa 
Monica, Rancho 
Boca de Santa 
Monica, and 
Rancho La
Ballona land
grants.
Col. Robert S. 
Baker & Senator 
John P . Jones 
record a map 
for the town of 
Santa Monica.
1924 1934 1940 's 1989 1996   2013 2016 2022 
Douglas 
Aircraft
builds military
aircraft at the
Santa Monica
Airport.
Muscle Beach 
ignites an 
international 
fitness craze 
on
Santa Monica
State Beach.
Expo Lightrail
opens 3 new
stations in
Santa Monica.
Local Santa 
Monica 
certfified a 
LEED Platinum 
City Declared in
Response to
COVID-19.
The first pilots
to fly around
the world take
off from Clover
Field.
The Santa
Monica Pier
Opens
Pacific Park
opens, 
bringing
back the first
full scale
amusement
park on the
Pier since the
1930’s.
Third Street 
Promenade 
opens.
Ken Genser
Square and
Tongva Park
open.


===== PAGE 103 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
SANTA MONICA AT A GLANCE
95
QUICK FACTS
POPULATION IN SANTA MONICA
AGE DISTRIBUTION IN 2023
1980
80,000 82,000 84,000 86,000 88,000 90,000 92,000 94,000
1990
2000
2010
2021
2023
88,314
86,905
84,084
89,736
91,103
91,535
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2023 American Community Survey
AGE GROUP
 0-4 3,973 (4.3%)
 5-19 10,035 (11.0%)
 20-64 59,916 (65.5%)
 65+ 17,611 (19.2%)
Educational Attainment:  71.9% Bachelor’s Degree or higher
Median Household Income:  $109,503
Percentage of Homeowners:  55.9% 
Percentage of Renters:  73.4% 
Households:  48,189
Median Gross Rent:   $2,294
Person per Household:  1.82
Median Value of Owner Occupied Housing:  $2,000,000+ 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2023 American Community Survey 


===== PAGE 104 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
SANTA MONICA AT A GLANCE
96
LOCAL ECONOMY
The City’s economy continues on a path to recovery in the aftermath of the COviD-19 global pandemic, changing 
consumer trends, increases in cost of living and inflation, legal costs, and the January 2025 Los Angeles wildfires.  
The city has made proactive investments to support local businesses, workers, and residents, including: adopting 
permanent outdoor dining and zoning changes to keep businesses open and workers employed; introducing 
Southern California’s first entertainment zone to the Third St Promenade to help support local restaurants and 
boost the vibrancy of the downtown;  welcoming 1,222 new housing units approved  for downtown; supporting 
free public art and cultural programming and events through the Art of Recovery program.
Even amid real challenges, Santa Monica maintains a very robust and diverse economy. Known as “Silicon Beach,” 
Santa Monica’s businesses are at the leading edge of the nation’s creative economy, venture capital and startup 
scene. People come from all over the world to work at companies like Activision, Red Bull, and  Snap.
From entertainment leaders like Universal Music Group and Lionsgate to startup successes like GoodRx, Truecar, 
and Beautycounter, Santa Monica is a hub for creativity and business innovation. Renowned healthcare providers 
like UCLA Medical Center, Providence St. John’s Health Center and Kaiser Permanente also call Santa Monica home 
and have played a pivotal role in the community’s care over the past three years. Santa Monica offers Class A 
office space with access to sun, surf, and a highly skilled workforce, along with a nationally recognized high-speed 
fiber optic network. Principal local employers are in the fields of education, municipal government, technology, 
fintech, health care, policy, and research. Santa Monica’s leading industry sectors are information Technology, 
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services, Accommodation and Food Services, and Health Care and Social 
Assistance (by employment).


===== PAGE 105 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
SANTA MONICA AT A GLANCE
97
Employers and employees are drawn to the area’s cultural, artistic, and recreational amenities. Unbeatable year- 
round sunshine and warm weather helps too! 
Tourism is an important driver of the local economy. Santa Monica attracts approximately 5 million visitors 
annually from around the world as well as regional day-trippers.  in 2023,, Santa Monica welcomed over 4.6 
million visitors who spent $938 million in Santa Monica, generating significant retail sales and transient occupancy 
tax revenues for the City.
5,747 jobs are supported by the tourism industry. The City’s 41 hotels typically operate with high occupancy rates 
year-round, apart from the recent dip due to COviD-19 and international travel restrictions.
Retail also plays a major role in Santa Monica’s economy. Santa Monica is home to a number of distinctive 
shopping districts. in the heart of Downtown, the Santa Monica Pier, Third Street Promenade, and Santa Monica 
Place draw locals and visitors alike. South of the Civic Center are the Main Street and Pico Boulevard districts, with 
eclectic shops, art, performance venues, and fine dining. On the north end of town, numerous boutiques and trendy 
restaurants line Montana Avenue, and Wilshire Boulevard provides an important thoroughfare throughout the city.
While our streets have had some quiet days over the last few years, residents, businesses, and workers are 
reemerging, and on an average day, tourists, shoppers, and employees significantly boost the daytime population 
to an estimated 250,000 people. The streets are now more vibrant than ever with the addition of outdoor dining 
activations throughout the city.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
The City of Santa Monica was incorporated on November 
30, 1886 and subsequently adopted a City Charter in 1945. 
in 1947, a Council-Manager form of government was 
established following a vote of the City’s residents and 
approval by the California legislature.
The City Council consists of seven members elected by the 
community at large to four-year terms.
Elections are held every two years, at which time either 
three or four Council members are elected. 
The Council selects the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore 
each December. 
City Council appoints a City Manager to administer the 
City, a City Attorney and a City Clerk. The City Council 
also serves as the governing bodies for the Santa Monica 
Redevelopment Successor Agency, the Housing and Parking 
Authorities, and the Public Financing Authority.


===== PAGE 106 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET
SANTA MONICA AT A GLANCE
98
SCHOOLS
The highly rated Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District (SMMUSD) serves both Santa Monica and Malibu 
residents. There are 10 elementary schools, two middle schools, three high schools, and an alternative K-8 school in 
the district. The City of Santa Monica provides $24 million in funding support to SMMUSD annually.
Santa Monica College (SMC) is one of the state’s top two-year community colleges. SMC serves over 30,000 full-
time and part-time students on several campuses and offers more than 300 new courses in 58 subject areas. For 
28 years, the college has ranked #1 in transferring students to the University of California, University of Southern 
California, and other four-year campuses.


===== PAGE 107 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW

===== PAGE 108 =====

99
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - OvERALL ECONOMiC CONDiTiONS
NATIONAL ECONOMY
U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was above average last year and is expected to slow in 2025 due to tariffs 
announced by the Trump administration but not fall into recession. Consumer spending, which comprises 
approximately 70% of GDP , was fairly robust last year. Consumers were buoyed by higher incomes, stock 
portfolios, and real estate prices. The Federal Reserve projects the consumer to pull back somewhat this year. 
inflation, the Consumer Price index (CPi), has declined materially from the peak in 2022. CPi remains sticky due in 
part to elevated home prices and insurance costs, and still above the Fed’s 2% long-run target. Economists expect 
inflation to increase in 2025 pursuant to tariff impacts.
The amount of funding recommended for programs and services is driven by available resources. Economic 
conditions at the national, state and local levels affect the level of revenue available to the City each year. This 
section identifies the existing economic conditions that influenced the development of the annual budget. The 
section includes summary charts for Citywide budgeted revenues and expenditures, including an overview of 
retirement expenditures and employee contributions. The section also presents summary information regarding 
the major tax revenues and their impact on the General Fund revenue forecasting, and revenue analysis for 
each fund.
Sources: Bloomberg, Bureau of Labor Statistics


===== PAGE 109 =====

100
The labor market remains robust, with an unemployment rate of 4.2%, which is below the lower limit of full 
employment (economists estimate the full employment range between 4.5% and 5.5%). The unemployment 
rate also remains very low from a long-term perspective. The Federal Reserve expects the unemployment rate to 
increase slightly by the end of 2025 to 4.4%.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - OvERALL ECONOMiC CONDiTiONS
Sources: Bloomberg, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Sources: Bloomberg, Bureau of Labor Statistics


===== PAGE 110 =====

101
The Fed Funds effective rate is currently at 4.33%, with market participants expecting the Fed to lower the Fed 
Funds rate to 3.5% by the end of 2025. However, recently Fed Chair Jerome Powell stated in light of the tariff 
uncertainty, “we are well positioned to wait for greater clarity before considering any adjustments to our policy 
stance. it is too soon to say what will be the appropriate path for monetary policy”.  
STATE ECONOMY
California's economy continues to be the largest in the United States and the fourth largest in the world, but 
its growth has slowed recently. While California's GDP has continued to increase, it has grown at a slower pace 
compared to the national average in recent years. Job growth has also slowed, and the state's unemployment 
rate at 5.3% has been higher than the national average. The state is adding fewer jobs per month as compared to 
previous years. While California has added jobs in key sectors like healthcare, retail, and transportation, it has also 
seen job losses in sectors like information technology and manufacturing. California’s housing prices increased by 
about 6% last year and are expected to continue to climb this year. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - OvERALL ECONOMiC CONDiTiONS
Sources: Bloomberg, CME


===== PAGE 111 =====

102
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - OvERALL ECONOMiC CONDiTiONS
Sources: Bloomberg, Bureau of Labor Statistics
California's economic outlook for 2025 presents a mixed picture, with expectations of modest growth tempered by 
ongoing challenges. Some of those challenges may come from tariffs which may raise costs to many industries.
LOCAL ECONOMY
Santa Monica has traditionally benefited from a diverse tax base, relying less on sales and property taxes compared 
to many other cities. While these taxes remain significant, the local economy is heavily dependent on retail, tourism, 
and the hospitality sector—industries that faced substantial declines during the pandemic. Although visitor activity 
has been steadily recovering, the pace remains slow. Remote work trends continue to impact daytime population 
levels and foot traffic in Santa Monica, leading to reduced consumer spending in restaurants and retail stores, 
which in turn affects sales tax revenues.  Currently, Santa Monica's daytime population stands at about 60% of its 
2019 levels, with retail and corporate vacancy rates exceeding regional averages.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) or Hotel Tax revenue recovery remains sluggish compared to pre-pandemic 
projections. Despite Measure CS, enacted in March 2023, which raised the TOT by 1% for hotels and 3% for 
homeshares, the rebound has been slower than anticipated. Recent projections indicate the city may not reach 2019 
peak tourism levels until late 2026 or early 2027, as tourism gradually rebounds. Sales Tax trends reflect reduced 
consumer spending in luxury and electric vehicle sales, driven by affordability challenges such as a 29% rise in car 
prices since the pandemic, higher financing costs, interest rates, and insurance premiums. Restaurants, especially 
fine dining establishments, have also been affected, with consumers opting for more budget-friendly options. 


===== PAGE 112 =====

103
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - OvERALL ECONOMiC CONDiTiONS
Parking revenues—a key visitor-related revenue source—show a moderate annual growth of 1.75%, reflecting 
pandemic-driven shifts like online shopping and remote work, which are expected to limit parking demand in the 
future. Additionally, increased adoption of alternative transportation methods such as rideshares, public transit, 
bicycles, scooters, and free downtown parking for the first 90 minutes may further impact parking revenue. A 
comprehensive citywide parking study, including supply and demand analysis, is underway, with findings expected 
by late 2025. 
Together, TOT, sales taxes, and parking-related revenues (including Parking Facility Taxes) make up 
46% of General Fund revenues.
Property Taxes have remained strong, supported by rising assessed values during the pandemic. While this 
growth is expected to continue, it may decelerate due to a softening real estate market influenced by higher 
interest rates. Business License Tax revenue from business license taxes has surpassed pre-pandemic levels. in 
November 2024, voters approved Tax Measure F , which modernizes the outdated business license tax structure. 
The measure exempts small businesses, reduces rates for most retailers and restaurants, raises the corporate 
headquarters rate to 0.25%, removes auto dealer tax exemptions, and reinstates a business license processing fee. 
These changes, being phased in over three years, are projected to generate an additional $3 million annually for 
the General Fund.
Sources: Bloomberg, Bureau of Labor Statistics


===== PAGE 113 =====

104
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - OvERALL ECONOMiC CONDiTiONS
Santa Monica’s 10% Parking Facilities Tax (PFT), established in 1993, applies to all public and private parking 
facilities. in 2024, voters approved Tax Measure K, increasing the PFT by 8% for privately owned facilities, bringing 
the total tax to 18%. This adjustment is expected to generate $6.7 million annually to support city services. City-
owned parking lots remain exempt, maintaining the original 10% tax rate.
Looking forward, total General Fund revenues are projected to grow by 3.2% in FY 2025-26 compared to the prior 
fiscal year's adjusted estimated actuals of $455.9 million, with an average annual increase of 3.7% over the next 
few years.
A more detailed discussion of local taxes follows the Citywide Budget overview. 


===== PAGE 114 =====

105
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW
TOTAL FY 2025-26 CITY REVENUES: $810.2 MILLION
Total projected City revenues for FY 2025-26 are 
$810.2 million, net of reimbursements and transfers. 
This represents a $34.8 million or 4.5% increase from 
the FY 2024-25 revised budget. The increase reflects 
greater General Fund revenues primarily from Parking 
Facility, Property taxes, and advertising revenue from 
the City’s Digital Wayfinding Kiosk program, reflecting 
an entire year of revenues from full implementation of 
the program, as well as moderate growth projected for 
Transient Occupancy tax revenue from some return of 
visitors and tourism due to anticipated major events in 
the region. in the other funds, revenues reflect increased 
grant and capital project expense reimbursements from 
funding agencies, approved solid waste rate adjustments, 
anticipated water and wastewater rate adjustments, 
and anticipated funding allocations from various other 
government agencies. Revenue details and projections for 
the next two fiscal years for all City funds are detailed in 
the Revenue Analysis section.  
TOTAL FY 2026-27 CITY REVENUES: $854.9 MILLION
Revenues in FY 2026-27 are projected to be $854.9 
million, net of reimbursements and transfers. This 
represents a $44.7 million or 5.5% increase from 
FY 2025-26, which includes greater General Fund 
revenues from continued implementation of the 
Business License Tax rate changes, moderate growth 
in Property Taxes, as well as slight growth in Sales 
Tax and Transient Occupancy tax from some return 
of visitors and tourism due to anticipated major 
events in the region. in the other funds, changes are 
primarily driven by similar areas as in FY 2025-26, 
including increased grant and capital project expense 
reimbursements from funding agencies, scheduled 
solid waste rate adjustments, anticipated water and 
wastewater rate adjustments, and increased office 
rental revenues in the Airport Fund. Revenue details 
and projections for the next two fiscal years for all City 
funds are detailed in the Revenue Analysis section.  
Citywide Revenues by Category
Citywide Revenues by Category
9.3%
26.1%
21.9%
Property Taxes
11.1%
Sales Taxes
19.2%
Other Taxes
15.1%
Charges for Services
24.9%
Other
5.6%
Transient 
Occupancy 
Taxes
4.7%
Utilities Users 
Taxes
0.5%
Business License 
Taxes
2.3%
Licenses & 
Permits
4.6%
intergovernmental 
& Grants
12.0%
Property Taxes
10.9%
Sales Taxes
18.2%
Other Taxes
15%
Charges for Services
25.8%
Other
5.5%
Transient 
Occupancy 
Taxes
4.6%
Utilities Users 
Taxes
0.5%
Business License 
Taxes
2.2%
Licenses & 
Permits
4.4%
intergovernmental 
& Grants
12.9%


===== PAGE 115 =====

106
TOTAL FY 2025-26 CITYWIDE EXPENDITURE BUDGET: $789.9 MILLION
The FY 2025-26 budget includes $789.9 million in 
expenditures, net of reimbursements and transfers, for all 
funds. This amount remains relatively level with the revised 
budget for FY 2024-25, primarily reflecting maintenance 
of effort and cost increases in the operating budget for 
compensation, health benefits, pension, insurance and 
operating expenses, such as utilities and fuels. Also included 
are operating subsidies and loans to the Pier Fund and 
Beach Fund, respectively, and adjustments for estimated 
grant funded operating and capital project expenditures. The 
increases are offset by reduced expenditure appropriations 
from the Measure GS Fund — FY 2025-26 expenditures will 
be programmed later in the fiscal year, once the revenue 
reporting period for FY 2024-25 has been reconciled and 
revised available balances are determined.
TOTAL FY 2026-27 CITYWIDE EXPENDITURE BUDGET: $825.5 MILLION
The FY 2026-27 budget includes $825.5 million in 
expenditures, net of reimbursements and transfers, for all 
funds. This amount represents a net increase of 4.5% from 
FY 2025-26, primarily due to an increase in programmed 
capital expenditures in the Stormwater, Water, Pier, Big Blue 
Bus, and General Funds. Operating expenditures continue 
to reflect maintenance of effort and cost increases in the 
operating budget for compensation, health benefits, pension, 
insurance and operating expenses, and operating subsidies 
and loans to the Pier Fund and Beach Fund, respectively.
The difference between Citywide revenues and expenditures 
is primarily due to disparities in timing between revenues 
and expenditures for capital and grant funded projects. 
The variance in the General Fund is addressed through the 
one-time use of working capital reserves. The General Fund’s 
revenue streams remain affected by the ongoing economic 
downturn triggered by the COviD-19 pandemic, with the retail, tourism, and hospitality sectors—key contributors 
funding city services—continuing to experience setbacks.
As in previous years, City revenues are subject to changes in economic conditions, State budget actions, and 
legislative changes.
Citywide Expenditures by Fund
(in millions)
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW
Citywide Expenditures by Fund
(in millions)
$253.0
55%
General Fund
 $468.6 
Enterprise Funds
 $296.4 
Other Funds
 $60.5 
General Fund
 $454.5 
Enterprise Funds
 $260.8 
Other Funds
 $74.6 


===== PAGE 116 =====

107
FY 2025-26 GENERAL FUND REVENUES: $470.4 MILLION; 
EXPENDITURES: $480.9 MILLION 
Total FY 2025-26 General Fund revenues are projected to be $470.4 million, which is $14.5 million (3.2%) greater 
than the FY 2024-25 revised budget. The General Fund Operating Expenditure Budget for FY 2025-26 is $465.7 
million, and Capital improvement Projects add an additional $15.2 million, for a total General Fund budget of 
$480.9 million. Operating expenditures increased $13.6 million, or 3.0% from the FY 2024-25 revised budget. The 
increase is primarily related to increases in employee compensation and benefits and projected increases in operating 
expenditures (including insurance, gas, and utilities), and subsidies and loans to the Pier Fund and Beach Fund.
Where does the money come from in FY 2025-26?
Where does the money go?
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW
Local Taxes
73.1% 
Charges for 
Services
12.3% 
Fines / Licenses / 
Permits
10.7% 
investments / 
Rents
2.8% 
All Other
1.1% 
Public Safety 
(Fire/Police)
38.8% 
Public Works
12.5% 
internal 
Services
13.9% 
Capital 
improvements
3.2% 
Community 
Development
4.2% 
Housing & 
Community 
Services
7.3% 
Library
2.4% 
Mobility & Parking
5.7% Non-Departmental
12.0% 


===== PAGE 117 =====

108
FY 2026-27 GENERAL FUND REVENUES: $488.4 MILLION; 
EXPENDITURES: $495.8 MILLION
Total FY 2026-27 General Fund revenues are projected to be $488.4 million, which is $18.0 million, or 3.8% 
more than in FY 2025-26. The General Fund Operating Expenditure Budget for FY 2026-27 is $476.3 million, and 
Capital improvement Projects add $19.5 million, for a total General Fund budget of $495.8 million. Operating 
expenditures are projected to increase by $10.6 million, or 2.3% over the FY 2025-26 Budget. Like FY 2025-26, the 
variance continues to reflect increases in employee compensation and benefits and projected increases in operating 
expenditures (including insurance, gas, and utilities), programming funds set aside during FY 2023-25 for the Human 
Services Grants Program, funding for the 2026 election costs, and subsidies and loans to the Pier Fund and Beach 
Fund. 
Where does the money come from in FY 2026-27?
Where does the money go?
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW
Local Taxes
72.9% 
Fines /
 Licenses / 
Permits
10.5% 
Charges for 
Services
12.2% 
investments / 
Rents
2.7% 
All Other
1.7% 
*The variance between revenues and expenditure is addressed through the one-time use of working capital reserves. The City’s revenue streams remain affected by the 
ongoing economic downturn triggered by the COviD-19 pandemic, with the retail, tourism, and hospitality sectors continuing to experience setbacks.
Public Safety 
(Fire/Police)
38.8% 
Public Works
12.6% 
internal 
Services
14% 
Capital 
improvements
4% 
Community 
Development
4.2% 
Housing & 
Community 
Services
7.5% 
Library
2.4% Mobility 
& Parking
5.7% 
Non-Departmental
10.8% 


===== PAGE 118 =====

109
OTHER FUNDS
in addition to the General Fund, the City budget includes a number of funds that are either self-sustaining or 
require assistance (subsidies or loans) from the General Fund, as projected upon completion of five-year financial 
forecasts for all funds.
The Water and Wastewater Funds will maintain positive balances throughout the five-year forecast period 
based on proposed rate adjustments directed by City Council on March 25, 2025, and scheduled to be adopted 
at the June 10, 2025, public hearing.  Both funds are making progress on a number of projects that will increase 
the locally sourced water supply and reduce the City’s reliance on imported water.  The projects support Reservoir 
improvements, Groundwater Well improvements, and the Arcadia Water Treatment Plant Operations Building 
Replacement in the Water Fund and improvements to the Moss Avenue Pump Station and Santa Monica Urban 
Runoff Recycling Facility (SMURFF) upgrades in the Wastewater Fund.  Historically, imported water has cost as 
much as 30% more than local water.  By continuing to invest in the local water supply, the City diversifies and 
enhances its drought resiliency and provides long-term cost savings and cost certainty for the community.  Staff 
recently completed a five-year Water and Wastewater rate study, conducted every five years, to align rates with 
the projected costs to provide water service. if approved by Council at the June 10, 2025 public hearing, the rate 
adjustments will take effect in July 2025. 
The Resource Recovery and Recycling (RRR) Fund will remain self-sufficient through FY 2029-30, partially 
attributed to the infusion of one-time funds from the closeout of old construction and demolition projects. The 
fund has experienced unexpected increases in expenses due to the closure of the Chiquita Canyon Landfill, partial 
relocation of RRR operations and rent payment to the Airport, increased costs for household hazardous waste 
collection services, and an increased reimbursement to the General Fund for utility billing services. As such, it will 
likely take the RRR Fund additional time beyond the current forecast period to build up to the 90-day reserve level 
as recommended by the 2023-28 Five-Year Solid Waste Rate Study. Staff will start planning for the next rate study 
in FY 2026-27.
The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Big Blue Bus (BBB) Fund biennial budget reflects the department’s 
continued commitment to providing safe, efficient, and reliable transportation to the community. Over the FY 
2025-27 biennial period, the department will make strategic investments which aim to improve BBB service 
delivery and routes, as well as increasing system-wide safety for transit riders and front-line staff. DOT will proudly 
make notable advancements in the electrification of the BBB fleet by receiving forty-five battery electric buses, 
which will expand its zero-emissions buses to 33% of the total fleet. Additionally, DOT will begin constructing 
and completing multiple phases of the electrical infrastructure needed to support its fleet conversion. BBB will 
maintain a balanced budget over the forecast period. 
The Airport Fund is projected to continue to have a healthy fund balance throughout the forecast period. 
Although revenues will decrease in FY 2025-26 mostly due to newly negotiated tenant lease credits, staff expects 
revenue to increase in future years.  Staff is moving forward on several previously postponed capital improvement 
projects in FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27, rehabilitation of Airport parking lots, and renovations to Airport buildings 
and facilities to enhance lease revenue opportunities.  Airport closure is planned for all aircraft operations after 
December 31, 2028.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW


===== PAGE 119 =====

110
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW
The Community Broadband Fund was incorporated into the General Fund, effective July 1, 2023. 
The Beach Recreation Fund, which supports Beach and Beach House operations, is projected to remain in a 
structural deficit during the forecast period through FY 2029-30. The fund was impacted by pandemic closures and 
has required $7.9 million in advances from the General Fund and a $1.45 million loan from the Special Revenue 
Source Fund since June 30, 2021. in addition, the Beach Fund is expected to require advances totaling nearly $8 
million during the biennial period, in part due to expected increases in the contract with Los Angeles County for 
lifeguard services.  The primary source of revenue for the Beach Fund is parking revenues, which have returned 
to pre-COviD levels. However, parking revenues will be impacted beginning in FY 2025-26 for construction 
staging related to the Pier Bridge Replacement project; all the pier deck parking and half of Beach Lot 1N will be 
impacted for two years, with a potential loss of up to $4 million in parking revenue. Every effort will be made to 
minimize the extent of the impact. Staff will revisit rate increases upon completing the citywide parking rate study, 
which is currently underway. Parking rate increases depend on California Coastal Commission (CCC) approvals, 
a prerequisite for implementing rate increases. $3.5 million in identified capital projects remain unfunded. in 
addition to the advances noted above, the fund is projected to require additional General Fund advances of 
$20 million for a total of $28 million between FY 2024-25 through FY 2029-30 if a parking rate increase is not 
implemented. Staff continues to seek efficiencies and revenue-generating opportunities to support unfunded 
capital expenditures and address the structural deficit.
The Cemetery Fund will maintain a positive fund balance throughout the five-year forecast period. Although 
there is a decrease in the fund balance, it is due to additional capital improvement projects that are in place to 
maintain the mausoleum infrastructure and enhance the cemetery grounds. Additionally, the FY 2025-27 biennial 
budget assumes a fee increase to offset the increased cost of landscaping services and other miscellaneous costs.  
Staff continues to assess overall Cemetery operations, projected plot sales, and reconfiguration and development 
of the Cemetery area to extend inventory and maintain fiscal sustainability.
The Housing Authority Fund is stable and will maintain a positive fund balance throughout the forecast period. 
The additional administrative funding provided through the CARES Act for the Santa Monica Housing Authority 
in FY 2021-22 supplemented traditional Section 8 administrative funding. This allowed the fund to build an 
administrative cash reserve and to ensure a positive fiscal outlook through the five-year forecast window.
The Pier Fund typically generates enough revenue to cover operating costs, but the fund cannot support the 
significant capital investment required to regularly maintain and upgrade the infrastructure. There are $19 million 
in unfunded Pier capital projects and it is projected that the fund will require General Fund subsidies of $9 million 
over the five-year forecast period (through FY 2029-30).  The primary revenue sources for the Pier Fund are lease 
payments and parking income. Revenues have seen a decrease, possibly attributable to impacts from the Palisades 
Fire, and SMPD directives to close portions of the Pier Deck; however, revenues have been bolstered by parking lot 
event rentals.   The Pier Bridge Replacement (funded through the Caltrans Highway Bridge Program) will impact 
parking revenues once construction begins in FY 2025-26, as the Pier Deck parking lot will be closed.   Staff 
continues to seek efficiencies and revenue-generating opportunities to support unfunded capital expenditures and 
to address the structural deficit. 


===== PAGE 120 =====

111
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW
The Measure GS Fund was established following the voter-approved real estate transfer tax measure adopted 
in November 2022 and implemented beginning March 1, 2023. This fund supports two primary areas: public 
education and homelessness prevention and affordable housing initiatives in the City of Santa Monica. Measure 
GS imposes a tax rate of $56 per $1,000 for properties sold or transferred at $8 million or more.
Annually, the first $10 million in revenue supports the Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District (SMMUSD), 
while the next $40 million is allocated to affordable housing and homelessness prevention efforts. Revenue 
beyond $50 million is distributed with 80% allocated to housing and homelessness initiatives and 20% to public 
education. A community-based Oversight Committee guides the allocation of these funds to ensure alignment with 
community priorities and equity principles. The fund is expected to remain fiscally sustainable over the forecast 
period, with revenues closely tied to activity in the high-value real estate market.
The Stormwater Management Fund receives revenues primarily from user fees and the Special Revenue 
Source Fund receives revenue from various sources, which are restricted and committed for specific uses. Both of 
these funds will generate adequate revenues to remain sustainable throughout the forecast period.
The Vehicle Management Fund and Information Technology Replacement & Services Fund will maintain 
positive balances throughout the forecast period. However, to maintain a positive balance, the funds have had to 
defer scheduled replacement and maintenance of equipment, primarily due to a two-year suspension/reduction 
in FY 2020-21 and FY 2021-22 in funding from the General Fund associated with revenue shortfalls from the 
pandemic. in the vehicle Management Fund, the suspension totaled $8.8 million and resulted in the majority 
of the 227 vehicles scheduled for replacement to be deferred to FY 2022-23 and beyond. in the information 
Technology Replacement & Services Fund, the suspension totaled $3.4 million and resulted in the deferment of all 
computer equipment replacements for two years beyond their scheduled replacement.  This is not sustainable, and 
funding needs to be restored. As General Fund revenues continue to gradually improve, funds are being earmarked 
to immediately address areas that cannot withstand the replacement timing lag and to gradually resume the 
replacement schedules. The General Fund will begin partial repayment to the information Technology Replacement 
& Services Fund beginning in FY 2027-28.
CITYWIDE TOTAL COMPENSATION
When determining total compensation, the City includes employee salaries, pension contributions, health care and 
workers’ compensation costs.  These items make up approximately 54% of the City’s overall operating budget, 
and approximately 67% of the General Fund operating budget. Healthcare costs make up approximately 10% 
of the total budgeted compensation. Pension costs make up 21% of the total budgeted compensation.  Workers’ 
compensation costs, which are not a negotiated benefit but are largely driven by State mandates, make up 
5% of total budgeted compensation. Further discussion of pension costs follows. To accommodate healthcare, 
pension, and workers’ compensation costs, cost of living adjustments (COLA) for employees consider the total 
compensation package and not just salary. 


===== PAGE 121 =====

112
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - CiTYWiDE BUDGET OvERviEW
PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS
The City’s defined benefit pension plan, Santa Monica Public Employees’ Retirement Plan, provides retirement and 
disability benefits, annual cost of living adjustments, and death benefits to plan members and beneficiaries. The 
plan is part of the Public Agency portion of the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS), which 
acts as a common investment and administrative agent for participating public employers within the State of 
California. Active full time employees in the plan reimburse the City for a portion of the costs. The overall level of 
annual contributions by City employees, using negotiated contribution levels as of June 30, 2022, is approximately 
27.5% of the total annual cost of pensions, while the percent contributed varies by plan (Police sworn, Fire sworn, 
Miscellaneous employee) and the length of time an employee has been with the City (Miscellaneous employees 
hired before July 2012 and public safety employees hired before January 2013 receive a higher benefit but pay 
between 15%-20% of the pension cost, while all other employees receive a lower pension benefit and pay 16%-
19% of the annual pension cost). 
Detail of gross projected pension plan costs for FY 2025-27, offset by employee reimbursements, is outlined below. 
FY 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
(in millions)
% of Operating 
Budget
FY 2026-27
Budget Plan 
(in millions)
% of Operating 
Budget
General Fund
Gross Pension Cost $95.0 $76.8 
Employee Contributions    24.1    24.3 
Net Pension Cost to the City $ 70.9 15.2% $ 73.5 15.4%
All Other Funds
Gross Pension Cost $28.5 $ 29.4 
Employee Contributions     9.9     10.0 
Net Pension Cost to the City $ 18.6 5.6% $ 19.4 5.8%
Total Gross Pension Cost $123.5 $127.2 
Total Employee Contributions    33.9    34.4 
Total Net Pension Cost to the City $ 89.5 11.2% $ 92.8 11.5%


===== PAGE 122 =====

113
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - MAJOR GENERAL FUND TAX BASE PROJECTiONS
Local taxes are projected to account for approximately 
74% of General Fund revenues in FY 2025-26. Five key tax 
sources—Transient Occupancy Taxes (TOT), Sales Taxes, 
Property Taxes, Utility Users Taxes (UUT), and Business 
License Taxes—represent $272.9 million, or 79% of the 
$343.6 million in total local tax revenue expected. The 
remaining tax revenues stem from Parking Facility Taxes, 
Real Property Transfer Taxes, vehicle License Fees, and 
Condominium Taxes.
The revenue projections reflect ongoing challenges in retail, 
tourism, and hospitality—sectors still recovering from the 
pandemic that continue to be impacted by visitor activity 
and consumer spending in Santa Monica. Hybrid work 
trends have reduced the daytime population to about 60% 
of 2019 levels, contributing to higher retail and corporate 
vacancy rates than regional averages, are slowing economic 
recovery. Additionally, international concerns about travel to the U.S. have dampened tourism growth. As always, 
economic uncertainties, including inflation, a potential economic downturn from tariffs and unforeseen state or 
federal legislative changes, could further affect the actual tax revenues received.
Revenue projections use standard methodologies, including trend analysis, fiscal impacts of legislative changes, 
consultant forecasts, and professional judgment, ensuring a prudent approach to forecasting.
PROPERTY TAXES — 19.1% OF GENERAL FUND REVENUES
Total assessed values in the City increased 4% in FY 2024-25, slightly lower than the annual average 6% increase 
over the last five years. While growth is expected to persist, it will likely slow due to a slight softening in the real 
estate market as interest rates remain high. Over the next two years, the City’s revenue growth of about 4% 
annually is expected before returning to a more moderate level of about 3.3% annually.
Revenue from unsecured property taxes (personal property and airplanes) is projected to remain relatively flat 
throughout the next few years, as are delinquent tax receipts and supplemental. Additionally, the City will continue 
to receive residual and pass-through payments from Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Funds (RPTTF) due to the 
dissolution of Redevelopment over ten years ago. 
All Other Non-Tax
26% 
Property Taxes
19% 
Sales Taxes
16% 
Transient Occupancy
 Taxes
16% 
Utilities Users 
Taxes
8% 
Business 
License Taxes
8% 
Parking Facility 
Taxes
4% 
Real Property 
Transfer Taxes
3% 


===== PAGE 123 =====

114
SALES TAXES — 16% OF GENERAL FUND REVENUES
Total sales taxes include the standard “Bradley Burns” 1% allocation of taxable sales that all cities receive as well 
as the Transaction and Use Tax (TUT), approved at one-half percent by Santa Monica voters in 2010 (Measure Y) 
and increased to 1% in November 2016 per ballot Measure GSH. Half of the TUT is paid to the Santa Monica−
Malibu Unified School District per a Master Facility Use agreement, following advisory measures approved by 
Santa Monica voters in 2010 and 2016, and another 25% is set aside for affordable housing uses following the 
2016 advisory measure. However, this housing set aside was temporarily suspended during the pandemic-induced 
economic downturn and is anticipated to resume in FY 2025-26.
While visitor activity is recovering, it remains slow, exacerbated by hybrid work trends. These shifts impact visitor 
activity and consumer spending. Sales tax collections have also been impacted by reduced consumer spending in 
retail and other areas, particularly in luxury and electric vehicle sectors. Factors like a 29% rise in car prices since 
the pandemic, higher financing costs, increased interest rates, and insurance premiums have driven these shifts. 
Restaurants, especially in the fine dining sector, are experiencing declines as consumers opt for more budget-
friendly options. This softening economy is anticipated to result in revenues showing essentially no growth in FY 
2025-26 before resuming a modest average annual growth of about 3% beginning in FY 2026-27.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES — 15.6% OF GENERAL FUND REVENUES
Forecasts for Transient Occupancy Taxes (TOT) have been developed in coordination with Santa Monica Travel and 
Tourism (SMTT). Although visitor activity has been steadily recovering, the pace remains slow. The Los Angeles 
wildfires and geopolitics have resulted in a slower rebound in tourism, TOT revenue recovery remains sluggish 
compared to pre-pandemic projections. Despite Measure CS, enacted in March 2023, which raised the TOT by 1% 
for hotels and 3% for homeshares, the revenue rebound has been slower than anticipated. Recent projections 
indicate the city may not reach peak 2019 tourism levels until late 2026 or early 2027, as tourism gradually 
rebounds. As of April 2025, local hotel average daily rate is lower with occupancy hovering around 70% citywide. 
Based on preliminary data from the Department of Commerce, U.S. Customs and Border Protection and outside 
organizations, international visits to the United States fell approximately 14% in March 2025 compared to the 
same period last year.  SMTT indicates that for every 1% drop in international visitor spending approximately $1.8 
billion is lost in export revenue annually. Therefore, if the 14% decline were to hold through 2025, the U.S. stands 
to lose $21 billion in travel-related exports.  These factors could further impact TOT revenue projections.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - MAJOR GENERAL FUND TAX BASE PROJECTiONS


===== PAGE 124 =====

115
UTILITY USERS TAXES — 8% OF GENERAL FUND REVENUES
Utility Users Taxes (UUT) are levied on the consumption of utilities such as electric, gas, and cable television. UUT 
growth is expected to be modest in the coming years at a rate of approximately 2% annually. This anticipated 
increase is due to water and wastewater rate increases which are expected to be partially offset by continuing 
decreases in taxes from hard wire, wireless telecommunications services and cable subscribers, reflecting a 
shift of consumer use to more internet based, non-taxable services. There is significant litigation underway that 
may impact the imposition of UUT on streaming video services. Staff will continue to monitor the status of the 
litigation.  
BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES — 7.8% OF GENERAL FUND REVENUES
Back-to-back years of historic Business License Tax (BLT) compliance efforts and significant increase in tax 
payments from our largest businesses resulted in FY 2024-25 business license tax revenue exceeding pre-
pandemic levels. Though the pandemic exacerbated the downward shift in brick and mortal businesses, gross 
receipts reported, and business license taxes collected have exceeded all previous years.
Measure F is expected to result in BLT revenue increase of approximately $3 million annually once fully 
implemented. Business license tax changes and penalty reductions will take effect in FY 2025-26, while the tax 
rate increases will be phased in over three years with the final increase being implemented in FY 2027-28. After 
Measure F is fully implemented, it is anticipated that business license tax growth will soften and is expected to 
level off to 2% annual increases. 
PARKING FACILITY TAXES — 3.9% OF GENERAL FUND REVENUES
Parking revenues, another significant revenue source affected by visitors, are experiencing an average annual 
growth of 1.75%. The pandemic accelerated many trends, including online shopping and remote working, that 
will likely impact visitor behavior and decrease parking demand in future years. Staff anticipates that demand for 
parking will continue to flatten or decline as consumers adopt alternative transportation methods, as well as the 
increased use of free parking in the City’s downtown structures (currently for the first 90 minutes).  Parking Facility 
Taxes (PFT), which are assessed on private and public parking fees in the city, are projected to increase over the 
next two years.  This is primarily due to Tax Measure K, enacted in January 2025, which increases the PFT by 8% 
for privately owned facilities, bringing the total tax to 18% and is anticipated to generate $6.7 million in annual 
revenues.
REAL PROPERTY (DOCUMENTARY) TRANSFER TAXES — 2.7% OF GENERAL 
FUND REVENUES
Real Property (Documentary) Transfer Tax revenues are very volatile, economy driven and can be skewed by very 
large-value transfers. The real estate market continued to exhibit strength during the pandemic as the number 
of annual property transfers increased sharply after dipping slightly at the onset of the pandemic. The volume of 
transfers dropped 44% and has remained relatively flat over the last couple of years, and tax receipts have shown 
a similar pattern over the same time period. The impact of Measure GS, approved by the voters in November 2022, 
added a third tier of the tax at $56 per $1,000 sale value for transfers $8 million. Revenues from the increase are 
deposited into the Measure GS Fund as the use of the funds are restricted.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
BUDGET OvERviEW - MAJOR GENERAL FUND TAX BASE PROJECTiONS


===== PAGE 125 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES

===== PAGE 126 =====

116
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - CLASSiFiCATiON OF FUNDS
The financial operations of the City are organized into funds for which budgets are prepared. 
These funds are grouped into three major categories: General, Capital Projects and Special 
Revenue, and Proprietary.
This section includes a description of the funds and their fund balance projections for the two 
budget years.
THE GENERAL FUND
The General Fund (01) is used to account for all financial resources necessary to carry out basic governmental 
activities of the City that are not accounted for in another fund. The General Fund supports essential City services 
such as police and fire protection, street maintenance, libraries, parks, and open space management. Most of the 
General Fund is financed from tax revenues.
 
CAPITAL PROJECTS AND SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS
Capital Projects and Special Revenue Funds are used to account for specific revenues that are generally legally 
restricted to expenditures for specified purposes.
• Asset Seizure Fund (21) — To account for the receipt and expenditure of federal and state asset 
forfeiture funds from equitable sharing programs. The federal guideline disallows a grantee to supplant its 
budget with asset seizure funds. 
• Beach Recreation Fund (11) — To account for beach parking, concession, and beach house revenues 
and expenditures related to beach maintenance and recreation activities.
• Citizens Option for Public Safety (COPS) Fund (22) — To account for the receipt and expenditure of 
the Citizens Option for Public Safety program established by AB3229 of 1996. in addition to disallowing a 
grantee to use the funds to supplant its budget, the State guideline requires a public hearing for the use 
of funds. Appropriations are recommended to the Council by a separate staff report after the hearing is 
conducted.
• Clean Beaches and Ocean Parcel Tax Fund (16) — To account for activity related to implementation of 
Watershed Management Plan and the passage of Measure v in November 2006.
• Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund (19) — To account for Federal entitlements under 
the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended. The City Council annually allocates 
CDBG funds to various programs.
• Gas Tax Fund (26) — To account for State and County gasoline tax allocations and any Federal funds 
provided to the City for street-related purposes.


===== PAGE 127 =====

117
• Housing Authority Fund (12) — To account for the receipt and expenditure of federal funds related to 
housing programs.
• Local Return Fund (27) —  To account for revenues and expenditures from the Proposition A, Proposition 
C and Measure R Local Return programs, three one-half cent sales tax measures approved by Los Angeles 
County voters to finance a countywide transit development program.
• Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Asset Fund (41) — To account for the revenues and expenditures 
formerly in the Low- and Moderate-income Housing Fund established under Community Redevelopment 
law.
• Measure GS Fund (29) — To account for receipt and expenditure of a third-tier documentary transfer tax 
of an additional 5% for property sales over $8 million with the revenue restricted to fund homelessness 
prevention, affordable housing projects, and schools.
• Miscellaneous Grants Fund (20) — To account for the receipt and expenditure of miscellaneous Federal, 
State and County awarded grants and special allocations provided to the City.
• Parks and Recreation Fund (28) — To account for funds collected under the City's Unit Dwelling Tax. 
These funds are to be used for the acquisition, improvement, and expansion of public parks, playgrounds, 
and recreational facilities.
• Rent Control Fund (25) — To account for revenues and expenditures of funds that are restricted or 
committed for Rent Control activities. Though included in the Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the 
fund is not discussed in this document, as the budget is prepared separately for the Rent Control Board’s 
adoption.
 
• South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Fund (18) — To account for the receipt of 
Air Quality Management District revenues and eligible expenditures.
• Special Revenue Source Fund (10) — To account for receipt and expenditure of monies restricted, 
committed or assigned for specific use.
• Tenant Ownership Rights Charter Amendment (TORCA) Fund (14) — To account for filing fee and 
conversion tax revenues and expenditures related to various housing programs authorized by Chapter XX 
of the City Charter.
PROPRIETARY (ENTERPRISE AND INTERNAL SERVICE) FUNDS
Proprietary (Enterprise and internal Service) Funds are used to account for operations that are financed and 
operated in a manner similar to private business enterprises where (a) the intent is that the costs (expenses, 
including depreciation) of providing goods or services to the general public or City departments on a continuing 
basis be financed or recovered primarily through user charges, or (b) the City has decided that periodic 
determination of revenues earned, expenses incurred and/or net income is appropriate for capital maintenance, 
public policy, management control, accountability, or other purposes.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - CLASSiFiCATiON OF FUNDS


===== PAGE 128 =====

118
• Airport Fund (57) — To account for revenues and expenses connected with management of the Santa 
Monica Municipal Airport.
• Big Blue Bus (BBB) Fund (60) — To account for revenues and expenses related to operation of the City's 
municipal bus lines.
• Cemetery Fund (59) — To account for revenues and expenses associated with operation of Woodlawn 
Cemetery and Mausoleum.
• Information Technology Replacement and Services Fund (71) — To account for user charges from 
other funds and expenses related to replacement of computer and telecommunication equipment.
• Parking Authority Fund (61) — The Parking Authority has been a financing authority for the City's 
parking structures.  
• Pier Fund (53) — To account for revenues and expenses connected with management and development 
of the Santa Monica Pier.
• Resource Recovery and Recycling (RRR) Fund (54) — To account for revenues and expenses of 
operating the City's refuse collection, street sweeping and cleaning, and recycling programs.
• Self-insurance, Bus Fund (73) — To account for contributions from the Big Blue Bus Fund and expenses 
related to the administration and payment of bus-related liability claims.
• Self-insurance, General Liability and Auto Fund (72) — To account for user charges from other funds 
and expenses related to the administration and payment of general liability and auto claims.
• Self-insurance, Risk Management Administration Fund (74) — To account for user charges from 
other funds and expenses related to the administration of the Risk Management Division.
• Self-insurance, Workers’ Compensation Fund (75) — To account for contributions from City 
Departments for administration and payment of workers' compensation claims.
• Stormwater Management Fund (52) — To account for revenues and expenses associated with 
stormwater management.
• Vehicle Management Fund (70) — To account for user charges from other funds and expenses related 
to replacement, maintenance and fueling of City-owned vehicles, including specialized mechanical 
equipment.
• Wastewater Fund (51) — To account for revenues and expenses associated with maintaining the 
sanitary sewer and storm drain systems within the City.
• Water Fund (50) — To account for revenues and expenses of providing water service. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - CLASSiFiCATiON OF FUNDS


===== PAGE 129 =====

119
Three other fund types that are included in the City’s Annual Comprehensive Financial Report are not budgeted for 
various reasons:
FIDUCIARY FUNDS
Fiduciary Funds are used to account for resources held for the benefit of parties outside the City. The fund 
resources are not available to support City programs and therefore they are not budgeted.
• Custodial Fund (80) — To account for assets held by the City as a trustee or as an agent for individuals 
or other governmental units.
• Private Purpose Trust Fund (43) — To account for the distribution of assets of the dissolved 
Redevelopment Agency of the City of Santa Monica.
• Street Light Fund (83) — To account for collected payments of street assessments.
PERMANENT FUNDS
Permanent Funds, which consist of Cemetery Perpetual Care (81) Fund and Mausoleum Perpetual Care (82) Fund, 
are used to report resources that reflect only earnings, not principal, to be used for City programs. Earnings from 
these two funds are transferred to the Cemetery Fund to support the cemetery operations. While the two perpetual 
care funds are not budgeted, the Cemetery Fund budgets the transfer amounts.
DEBT SERVICE FUND
Debt Service Fund is used to account for the accumulation of resources for, and the payment of, general long-term 
debt principal, interest and related costs for public facilities.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - CLASSiFiCATiON OF FUNDS


===== PAGE 130 =====

120
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - FUND BALANCE PROJECTiONS
The following section shows appropriable fund balance projections for each year of the biennial 
budget in the three major categories:  General Fund, Special Revenue funds, and Proprietary 
(Enterprise and internal Service) funds. Funds are budgeted to maintain a positive balance on a 
yearly basis. in the cases where budgeted expenditures exceed revenues, this indicates one-time 
capital projects where expenditures are funded from prior years’ revenue held in reserve for this 
purpose, except in the case of the Housing Authority, which requires a transfer of funds from the 
Special Revenue Source Fund.


===== PAGE 131 =====

121
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - FUND BALANCE PROJECTiONS (FY 2025-26)
Fund Category/Type
6/30/2025
Projected 
Ending
Fund Balance
FY 2025-26 
Budgeted 
Revenues
FY 2025-26 
Budgeted 
Expenditures
Operating 
Transfers / 
Use of 
Reserves
6/30/2026
Projected 
Ending
Fund Balance Change $
Change 
%
General a
100,000$          470,416,570$   (480,870,179)$  10,453,609$     100,000$          -$                      0.0%                    
Beach Recreation b 312,474            17,030,121       (18,437,203)      1,094,608         -                    (312,474)           -100.0%
Citizens' Option for Public Safety 1,108,099         245,000            (196,276)           -                    1,156,823         48,724              4.4%
Clean Beaches / Ocean Parcel Tax 2,628,393         5,047,238         (6,110,672)        -                    1,564,959         (1,063,434)       -40.5%
CDBG c -                    1,201,825         (1,380,797)        178,972            -                    -                    N/A
Gas Tax 5,843                5,047,633         (5,050,216)        -                    3,260                (2,583)               -44.2%
Housing Authority 2,729,908         30,736,186       (31,378,787)      -                    2,087,307         (642,601)           -23.5%
Local Return c 8,831,433         8,818,479         (9,737,342)        -                    7,912,570         (918,863)           -10.4%
Low/Moderate Income Housing Asset 14,107,982       500,000            (400,000)           -                    14,207,982       100,000            0.7%
Measure GS 1,186,078         -                    (490,219)           -                    695,859            (490,219)           -41.3%
Miscellaneous Grants c 872,308            20,260,312       (21,053,599)      -                    79,021              (793,287)           -90.9%
Parks and Recreation Facilities 3,000                3,000                -                    -                    6,000                3,000                100.0%
SCAQMD AB2766 444,342            132,000            (120,000)           -                    456,342            12,000              2.7%
Special Revenue Source 67,522,890       4,267,318         (534,082)           -                    71,256,126       3,733,236         5.5%
TORCA 1,369,316         147,000            (56,367)             -                    1,459,949         90,633              6.6%                    
Airport 14,943,238       12,954,163       (21,440,078)      -                    6,457,323         (8,485,915)       -56.8%
Big Blue Bus 259,474,134     120,550,617     (110,790,082)    -                    269,234,669     9,760,535         3.8%
Cemetery 3,840,107         2,712,532         (2,854,459)        -                    3,698,180         (141,927)           -3.7%
Parking Authority 112,106            5,000                (900)                  -                    116,206            4,100                3.7%
Pier 3,807,912         9,005,217         (8,113,121)        -                    4,700,008         892,096            23.4%
Resource Recovery and Recycling 3,135,693         44,844,858       (45,683,991)      -                    2,296,560         (839,133)           -26.8%
Stormwater Management d 2,075,017         2,090,000         (1,688,103)        (400,000)           2,076,914         1,897                0.1%
Wastewater e 28,815,282       27,557,891       (35,262,441)      (2,892,931)        18,217,801       (10,597,481)     -36.8%
Water f -                    54,131,458       (50,005,878)      (1,588,273)        2,537,307         2,537,307         N/A                     
ENTERPRISE FUNDS
GENERAL FUND
SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS
FUND BALANCE PROJECTIONS FY 2025-26


===== PAGE 132 =====

122
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - FUND BALANCE PROJECTiONS (FY 2025-26)
Fund Category/Type
6/30/2025
Projected 
Ending
Fund Balance
FY 2025-26 
Budgeted 
Revenues
FY 2025-26 
Budgeted 
Expenditures
Operating 
Transfers / 
Use of 
Reserves
6/30/2026
Projected 
Ending
Fund Balance Change $
Change 
%
FUND BALANCE PROJECTIONS FY 2025-26
Info Tech Replacement and Services -                    3,214,887         (3,203,387)        -                    11,500              11,500              N/A
Self-Insurance, Bus 5,258,025         8,270,000         (5,905,882)        -                    7,622,143         2,364,118         45.0%
Self-Insurance, General / Auto Liability 18,416,922       24,155,000       (11,185,047)      -                    31,386,875       12,969,953       70.4%
Self-Insurance, Risk Management Admin 4,304,661         8,723,442         (8,649,372)        -                    4,378,731         74,070              1.7%
Self-Insurance, Workers' Compensation 60,872,743       21,370,000       (16,580,898)      -                    65,661,845       4,789,102         7.9%
Vehicle Management g 17,670,359       22,150,410       (20,438,154)$    (107,500)$         19,275,115$     1,604,756$       9.1%
Total All Funds 523,948,262$   925,588,157$   (917,617,532)$  6,738,485$       538,657,375$   14,709,113$     2.8%
INTERNAL SERVICE FUNDS
c. The CDBG (19), Miscellaneous Grants (20) and Local Return (27) funds revenues and expenditures do not consistently balance on an annual basis. Grant revenues are 
     difficult to predict in any given year due to timing of when expenditures are incurred and when reimbursements are processed by the funding agency.
e. The Wastewater (51) Fund reflects payment of debt service to the Clean Water State Revolving Fund for the Sustainable Water Infrastructure Project and use
    of reserves set aside for future capital projects which are reflected in the budgeted expenditures.
g. The Vehicle Management (70) Fund transfer reflects the set aside of funds to reserves to support future fuel station replacement.
b. The Beach Recreation (11) Fund reflects a $3.4 million advance/loan from the General (01) Fund, which is included in the budgeted expenditures. Depending on actual 
    spending, General Fund support may differ from the projected amount. In addition, operating and capital expenditures will be re-evaluated on an ongoing basis to determine
    if any projects need to paused in order to keep the fund balanced - this is reflected in operating transfers.
d. The Stormwater Management (52) Fund includes a transfer to set aside funds in reserves to support future capital projects.
f. The Water (50) Fund reflects payment of debt service on the Water Revenue Bond partially offset by the use of Gillette Boeing Settlement reserves to fund capital water
    projects which are reflect in the budgeted expenditures.
a. The General (01) Fund June 30, 2025 projected ending fund balance reflects use of reserves anticipated to be needed during the biennial budget period. The expenditures 
    do not yet reflect the impact of Cost of Living Adjustments (COLAs) for any bargaining group, as labor negotiations in progress and have not been finalized.


===== PAGE 133 =====

123
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - FUND BALANCE PROJECTiONS (FY 2026-27)
Fund Category/Type
6/30/2026
Projected 
Ending
Fund Balance
FY 2026-27 
Budgeted 
Revenues
FY 2026-27 
Budgeted 
Expenditures
Operating 
Transfers / 
Use of 
Reserves
6/30/2027 
Projected 
Ending 
Fund Balance Change $
Change 
%
General a 100,000$          488,381,527$   (495,769,477)$  7,487,950$       200,000$          100,000$          100.0%
Beach Recreation b -                    16,072,879       (19,444,944)      3,372,065         -                    -                    N/A
Citizens' Option for Public Safety 1,156,823         245,000            (200,202)           -                    1,201,621         44,798              3.9%
Clean Beaches / Ocean Parcel Tax 1,564,959         5,128,954         (5,739,795)        -                    954,118            (610,841)           -39.0%
CDBG -                    1,201,825         (432,987)           -                    768,838            768,838            N/A
Gas Tax 3,260                5,148,526         (4,655,040)        -                    496,746            493,486            15137.6%
Housing Authority 2,087,307         30,929,312       (31,417,594)      -                    1,599,025         (488,282)           -23.4%
Local Return 7,912,570         8,818,479         (5,553,695)        -                    11,177,354       3,264,784         41.3%
Low/Moderate Income Housing Asset 14,207,982       500,000            (400,000)           -                    14,307,982       100,000            0.7%
Measure GS 695,859            -                    (519,780)           -                    176,079            (519,780)           -74.7%
Miscellaneous Grants 79,021              14,898,178       (14,478,514)      -                    498,685            419,664            531.1%
Parks and Recreation Facilities 6,000                3,000                -                    -                    9,000                3,000                50.0%
SCAQMD AB2766 456,342            132,000            -                    -                    588,342            132,000            28.9%
Special Revenue Source 71,256,126       4,115,091         51,968              -                    75,423,185       4,167,059         5.8%
TORCA 1,459,949         147,000            (56,494)             -                    1,550,455         90,506              6.2%                    
Airport 6,457,323         17,978,145       (22,449,437)      -                    1,986,031         (4,471,292)       -69.2%
Big Blue Bus c 269,234,669     135,463,327     (109,253,237)    (47,537,070)      247,907,689     (21,326,980)     -7.9%
Cemetery 3,698,180         2,795,894         (2,943,043)        -                    3,551,031         (147,149)           -4.0%
Parking Authority 116,206            5,000                (900)                  -                    120,306            4,100                3.5%
Pier d 4,700,008         8,941,170         (15,538,400)      1,897,222         -                    (4,700,008)       -100.0%
Resource Recovery and Recycling 2,296,560         48,271,982       (46,902,422)      -                    3,666,120         1,369,560         59.6%
Stormwater Management e 2,076,914         2,090,000         (11,877,550)      8,678,122         967,486            (1,109,428)       -53.4%
Wastewater f 18,217,801       29,955,133       (29,444,202)      (2,320,430)        16,408,302       (1,809,499)       -9.9%
Water g 2,537,307         62,017,558       (60,763,118)      (2,377,947)        1,413,800         (1,123,507)       -44.3%                                         
FUND BALANCE PROJECTIONS FY 2026-27
GENERAL FUND
SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS
ENTERPRISE FUNDS


===== PAGE 134 =====

124
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
FUND BALANCES - FUND BALANCE PROJECTiONS (FY 2026-27)
Fund Category/Type
6/30/2026
Projected 
Ending
Fund Balance
FY 2026-27 
Budgeted 
Revenues
FY 2026-27 
Budgeted 
Expenditures
Operating 
Transfers / 
Use of 
Reserves
6/30/2027 
Projected 
Ending 
Fund Balance Change $
Change 
%
FUND BALANCE PROJECTIONS FY 2026-27
Info Tech Replacement and Services 11,500              3,691,616         (3,680,116)        -                    23,000              11,500              100.0%
Self-Insurance, Bus 7,622,143         9,295,000         (6,310,919)        -                    10,606,224       2,984,081         39.2%
Self-Insurance, General / Auto Liability 31,386,875       24,799,000       (12,018,454)      -                    44,167,421       12,780,546       40.7%
Self-Insurance, Risk Management Admin 4,378,731         9,818,247         (9,749,254)        -                    4,447,724         68,993              1.6%
Self-Insurance, Workers' Compensation 65,661,845       20,895,000       (17,007,833)      -                    69,549,012       3,887,167         5.9%
Vehicle Management h 19,275,115$     22,493,396$     (18,258,435)$    (107,500)$         23,402,576$     4,127,461$       21.4%
Total All Funds 538,657,375$   974,232,239$   (944,813,874)$  (30,907,588)$    537,168,152$   (1,489,223)$     -0.3%
g. The Water (50) Fund reflects payment of debt service on the Water Revenue Bond partially offset by the use of Gillette Boeing Settlement reserves to fund capital water
    projects.
h. The Vehicle Management (70) Fund transfer reflects the set aside of funds to reserves to support future fuel station replacement.
d. The Pier (11) Fund reflects a $1.3 million advance/loan from the General (01) Fund, which is included in the budgeted expenditures. Depending on actual spending, 
    General Fund support may differ from the projected amount. In addition, operating and capital expenditures will be re-evaluated as part of the FY 2026-27 Operating 
    Budget and FY 2026-28 Biennial Capital Improvement Program budget process to determine if any projects need to paused in order to keep the fund balanced.
e. The Stormwater Management (52) Fund includes a transfer to set aside funds in reserves to support future capital projects as well as use of reserves for the planned 
     Pico-Kenter watershed project.
f. The Wastewater (51) Fund transfer reflects use reserves for payment of debt service to the Clean Water State Revolving Fund for the Sustainable Water Infrastructure
    Project.
INTERNAL SERVICE FUNDS
a. The General (01) Fund June 30, 2026 projected ending fund balance reflects use of reserves anticipated to be needed during the biennial budget period. The expenditures 
     do not yet reflect the impact of Cost of Living Adjustments (COLAs) for any bargaining group, as labor negotiations in progress and have not been finalized.
b. The Beach Recreation (11) Fund reflects a $4.5 million advance/loan from the General (01) Fund, which is included in the budgeted expenditures. Depending on actual 
    spending, General Fund support may differ from the projected amount. In addition, operating and capital expenditures will be re-evaluated as part of the FY 2026-27
    Operating Budget and FY 2026-28 Biennial Capital Improvement Program budget process to determine if any projects need to paused in order to keep the fund balanced - 
    this is reflected in operating transfers.
c. FY 2026-27 budgeted capital expenditures are subject to change due to potential changes in capital activity. Transfers reflected in this table serves as an adjustment
    related to additional capital expenditures that will be programmed as part of the FY 2026-28 Biennial Capital Improvement Program budget process.


===== PAGE 135 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES

===== PAGE 136 =====

125
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - SUMMARY BY CATEGORY & FUND (FY 2025-26)
Fund Property
Taxes Sales Taxes Other Taxes Licenses & 
Permits
Fines and 
Forfeitures
Charges for 
Services
Investment / 
Rent
Inter- 
governmental / 
Grants
Other Budget Total
General 89,817,354$    75,218,725$      178,569,469$    37,066,470$    13,288,553$    57,958,555$      13,339,054$   1,510,929$         3,647,461$      470,416,570$    
Airport -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   11,449,336        475,000          -                      1,029,827        12,954,163        
Beach Recreation -                   -                     -                     52,500             -                   13,675,263        1,876,280       46,034                1,380,044        17,030,121        
Big Blue Bus -                   80,350,555        -                     -                   -                   8,800,111          -                  27,636,254         3,763,697        120,550,617      
Cemetery -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   2,576,872          40,000            -                      95,660             2,712,532          
COPS -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     10,000            235,000              -                   245,000             
Clean Beaches &
Ocean Parcel Tax -                   -                     4,080,015          -                   -                   -                     130,000          837,223              -                   5,047,238          
CDBG -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  1,201,825           -                   1,201,825          
Gas Tax -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     3,000              5,044,633           -                   5,047,633          
Housing Authority -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  30,736,186         -                   30,736,186        
Information Technology -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   3,203,387          10,000            -                      1,500.00          3,214,887          
Local Return -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  8,818,479           -                   8,818,479          
Low & Moderate Income
Housing Asset -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     100,000          -                      400,000           500,000             
Misc. Grants -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  20,260,312         -                   20,260,312        
Parking Authority -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     5,000              -                      -                   5,000                 
Parks & Recreation -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     3,000              -                      -                   3,000                 
Pier -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   8,894,883          110,334          -                      -                   9,005,217          
Resource Recovery & 
Recycling -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   44,178,372        250,000          -                      416,486           44,844,858        
Self-insurance, Bus -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   8,200,000          70,000            -                      -                   8,270,000          
Self-Insurance, General
Liability/Auto -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   24,000,000        155,000          -                      -                   24,155,000        
Self-insurance, Risk
Management Admin -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   8,723,442          -                  -                      -                   8,723,442          
Self-insurance, Workers' 
Comp -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   20,600,000        770,000          -                      -                   21,370,000        
SCAQMD -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     10,000            122,000              -                   132,000             
Special Revenue Source -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   441,000             430,000          936,510              2,459,808        4,267,318          
Stormwater -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   1,640,000          50,000            -                      400,000           2,090,000          
TORCA -                   -                     25,000               -                   -                   -                     -                  -                      122,000           147,000             
Vehicle Management -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   21,559,710        440,000          -                      150,700           22,150,410        
Wastewater -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   26,682,891        475,000          -                      400,000           27,557,891        
Water -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   53,276,458        300,000          -                      555,000           54,131,458        
SUBTOTAL 89,817,354$    155,569,280$    182,674,484$    37,118,970$    13,288,553$    315,860,280$    19,051,668$   97,385,385$       14,822,183$    925,588,157$    
Reimbursements &
Transfers -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   (113,620,501)     (1,751,769)      -                      -                   (115,372,270)     
TOTAL 89,817,354$    155,569,280$    182,674,484$    37,118,970$    13,288,553$    202,239,779$    17,299,899$   97,385,385$       14,822,183$    810,215,887$    
FY 2025-26 REVENUE SUMMARY BY CATEGORY & FUND


===== PAGE 137 =====

126
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - SUMMARY BY CATEGORY & FUND (FY 2026-27)
Fund Property
Taxes Sales Taxes Other Taxes Licenses & 
Permits
Fines and 
Forfeitures
Charges for 
Services
Investment / 
Rent
Inter- 
governmental / 
Grants
Other Budget Total
General 93,547,328$    77,222,301$      185,534,746$    37,910,812$    13,366,273$    59,424,390$      13,138,594$   2,341,626$         5,895,457$      488,381,527$    
Airport -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   16,447,904        475,000          -                      1,055,241        17,978,145        
Beach Recreation -                   -                     -                     52,500             -                   12,656,675        1,932,344       47,415                1,383,945        16,072,879        
Big Blue Bus -                   78,556,945        -                     -                   -                   8,929,740          -                  44,947,428         3,029,214        135,463,327      
Cemetery -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   2,657,077          40,000            -                      98,817             2,795,894          
COPS -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     10,000            235,000              -                   245,000             
Clean Beaches &
Ocean Parcel Tax -                   -                     4,161,615          -                   -                   -                     130,000          837,339              -                   5,128,954          
CDBG -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  1,201,825           -                   1,201,825          
Gas Tax -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     3,000              5,145,526           -                   5,148,526          
Housing Authority -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  30,929,312         -                   30,929,312        
Information Technology -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   3,680,116          10,000            -                      1,500.00          3,691,616          
Local Return -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  8,818,479           -                   8,818,479          
Low & Moderate Income
Housing Asset -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     100,000          -                      400,000           500,000             
Misc. Grants -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     -                  14,898,178         -                   14,898,178        
Parking Authority -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     5,000              -                      -                   5,000                 
Parks & Recreation -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     3,000              -                      -                   3,000                 
Pier -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   8,830,836          110,334          -                      -                   8,941,170          
Resource Recovery & 
Recycling -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   47,599,919        250,000          -                      422,063           48,271,982        
Self-insurance, Bus -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   9,225,000          70,000            -                      -                   9,295,000          
Self-Insurance, General 
Liability/Auto -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   24,644,000        155,000          -                      -                   24,799,000        
Self-insurance, Risk
Management Admin -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   9,818,247          -                  -                      -                   9,818,247          
Self-insurance, Workers' 
Comp -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   20,125,000        770,000          -                      -                   20,895,000        
SCAQMD -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   -                     10,000            122,000              -                   132,000             
Special Revenue Source -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   441,000             430,000          936,510              2,307,581        4,115,091          
Stormwater -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   1,640,000          50,000            -                      400,000           2,090,000          
TORCA -                   -                     25,000               -                   -                   -                     -                  -                      122,000           147,000             
Vehicle Management -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   21,902,696        440,000          -                      150,700           22,493,396        
Wastewater -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   29,080,133        475,000          -                      400,000           29,955,133        
Water -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   61,162,558        300,000          -                      555,000           62,017,558        
SUBTOTAL 93,547,328$    155,779,246$    189,721,361$    37,963,312$    13,366,273$    338,265,291$    18,907,272$   110,460,638$     16,221,518$    974,232,239$    
Reimbursements &
Transfers -                   -                     -                     -                   -                   (117,596,045)     (1,761,331)      -                      -                   (119,357,376)     
TOTAL 93,547,328$    155,779,246$    189,721,361$    37,963,312$    13,366,273$    220,669,246$    17,145,941$   110,460,638$     16,221,518$    854,874,863$    
FY 2026-27 REVENUE SUMMARY BY CATEGORY & FUND


===== PAGE 138 =====

127
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - FivE-YEAR REvENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27
FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 Revised Proposed Change Change Budget
Fund/Revenue Category Actual Actual Budget Budget Amount Percent Plan
Property Taxes 79,661,790$       84,082,967$       86,296,573$       89,817,354$       3,520,781$         4.1% 93,547,328$       
Sales Taxes 78,509,804 72,813,915         75,301,043         75,218,725         (82,318)               -0.1% 77,222,301         
Other Local Taxes 155,819,815 160,596,920       170,904,643       178,569,469       7,664,826           4.5% 185,534,746       
Licenses and Permits 36,249,349 36,143,488         36,750,796         37,066,470         315,674              0.9% 37,910,812         
Fines and Forfeitures 13,641,865 12,094,496         14,442,020         13,288,553         (1,153,467)          -8.0% 13,366,273         
Charges for Services 50,381,884 65,547,237         54,232,270         57,958,555         3,726,285           6.9% 59,424,390         
Investment (Interest) 3,098,154 5,134,886           3,700,000           5,000,000           1,300,000           35.1% 4,300,000           
Rentals 7,998,342 8,420,016           8,284,135           8,339,054           54,919                0.7% 8,838,594           
Intergovernmental 4,334,208 1,511,278           2,276,801           1,510,929           (765,872)             -33.6% 2,341,626           
Other 5,017,501 2,647,213           3,767,735           3,647,461           (120,274)             -3.2% 5,895,457           
Total General Fund 434,712,713$     448,992,417$     455,956,016$     470,416,570$     14,460,554$       3.2% 488,381,527$     
Charges for Services 17,223,341$       16,759,069$       13,378,466$       11,449,336$       (1,929,130)$        -14.4% 16,447,904$       
Investment (Interest) 378,323 1,048,639 270,000 475,000 205,000              75.9% 475,000
Other 1,239,184 1,372,226           1,194,987           1,029,827           (165,160)             -13.8% 1,055,241           
Total Airport Fund 18,840,848$       19,179,934$       14,843,453$       12,954,163$       (1,889,290)$        -12.7% 17,978,145$       
Investment (Interest) 16,795$              39,922$              -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Intergovernmental 169,050 55,209 -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Total Airport Fund 185,845$            95,131$              -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Licenses & Permits 75,791$              45,444$              123,250$            52,500$              (70,750)$             -57.4% 52,500$              
Charges for Services 13,276,823 14,500,090 14,457,279 13,675,263 (782,016)             -5.4% 12,656,675
Investment (Interest) 58,567 73,504 -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Rentals 1,597,237 1,568,785 1,735,056 1,876,280 141,224              8.1% 1,932,344
Intergovernmental 36,646                44,693                38,127                46,034 7,907                  20.7% 47,415
Other 1,467,710 1,625,221           1,789,309           1,380,044           (409,265)             -22.9% 1,383,945           
Total Beach Recreation Fund 16,512,773$       17,857,736$       18,143,021$       17,030,121$       (1,112,900)$        -6.1% 16,072,879$       
AIRPORT FUND
BEACH RECREATION FUND
FIVE-YEAR REVENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 to FY 2025-26
GENERAL FUND
ASSET SEIZURE FUND


===== PAGE 139 =====

128
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - FivE-YEAR REvENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27
FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 Revised Proposed Change Change Budget
Fund/Revenue Category Actual Actual Budget Budget Amount Percent Plan
FIVE-YEAR REVENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 to FY 2025-26
Sales Taxes 26,896,623$       60,830,686$       81,881,254$       80,350,555$       (1,530,699)$        -1.9% 78,556,945$       
Charges for Services 9,845,665 10,807,704 9,500,333 8,800,111 (700,222)             -7.4% 8,929,740
Investment (Interest) 513,513 1,703,212 -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Capital Grants 49,622,292 14,351,735 26,938,114 27,636,254 698,140              2.6% 44,947,428
Other 4,751,804 4,400,371           3,708,500           3,763,697           55,197                1.5% 3,029,214           
Total Big Blue Bus Fund 91,629,897$       92,093,709$       122,028,201$     120,550,617$     (1,477,584)$        -1.2% 135,463,327$     
Charges for Services 2,490,120$         2,397,382$         2,322,517$         2,576,872$         254,355$            11.0% 2,657,077$         
Investment (Interest) 32,452 92,979                5,000                  40,000                35,000                700.0% 40,000                
Other 87,126 93,831                95,660                95,660                -                          0.0% 98,817                
Total Cemetery Fund 2,609,699$         2,584,192$         2,423,177$         2,712,532$         289,355$            11.9% 2,795,894$         
Investment (Interest) 7,817$                21,863$              5,000$                10,000$              5,000$                100.0% 10,000$              
Intergovernmental 235,684 265,576              235,000              235,000              -                          0.0% 235,000              
Total COPS Fund 243,502$            287,439$            240,000$            245,000$            5,000$                2.1% 245,000$            
Other Local Taxes 3,701,772$         3,886,658$         3,733,376$         4,080,015$         346,639$            9.3% 4,161,615$         
Investment (Interest) 150,550              395,028              130,000              130,000              -                          0.0% 130,000              
Intergovernmental 3,334,223           858,479              812,835              837,223              24,388                3.0% 837,339              
Total Clean Bchs & Ocean Prcl Tax Fund 7,186,545$         5,140,165$         4,676,211$         5,047,238$         371,027$            7.9% 5,128,954$         
Charges for Services 3,227,637$         -$                        -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Investment (Interest) 4,802 -                          -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Total Community Broadband Fund 3,232,439$         -$                        -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Investment (Interest) 835$                   -$                        5,000$                -$                        (5,000)$               -100.0% -$                        
Intergovernmental 230,869              696,121              1,194,558           1,201,825           7,267                  0.6% 1,201,825           
Total CDBG Fund 231,704$            696,121$            1,199,558$         1,201,825$         2,267$                0.2% 1,201,825$         
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANTS (CDBG) FUND
CEMETERY FUND
COMMUNITY BROADBAND FUND
CITIZENS' OPTION FOR PUBLIC SAFETY (COPS) FUND
CLEAN BEACHES & OCEAN PARCEL TAX FUND
BIG BLUE BUS FUND


===== PAGE 140 =====

129
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - FivE-YEAR REvENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27
FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 Revised Proposed Change Change Budget
Fund/Revenue Category Actual Actual Budget Budget Amount Percent Plan
FIVE-YEAR REVENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 to FY 2025-26
Investment (Interest) 59,749$              159,046$            18,000$              3,000$                (15,000)$             -83.3% 3,000$                
Intergovernmental 4,394,139 4,876,773           5,033,225           5,044,633           11,408                0.2% 5,145,526           
Total Gas Tax Fund 4,453,888$         5,035,819$         5,051,225$         5,047,633$         (3,592)$               -0.1% 5,148,526$         
Investment (Interest) 19,837$              58,039$              -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Intergovernmental 26,635,743 27,967,064         28,977,190         30,736,186         1,758,996           6.1% 30,929,312         
Total Housing Authority Fund 26,655,580$       28,025,103$       28,977,190$       30,736,186$       1,758,996$         6.1% 30,929,312$       
Charges for Services 2,328,222$         2,416,447$         3,068,414$         3,203,387$         134,973$            4.4% 3,680,116$         
Investment (Interest) 6,466 10,381 100,000              10,000                (90,000)               -90.0% 10,000                
Other -                          3,462                  -                          1,500                  1,500                  N/A 1,500                  
Total Information Technology Fund 2,334,688$         2,430,290$         3,168,414$         3,214,887$         46,473$              1.5% 3,691,616$         
Investment (Interest) 186,031$            472,783$            -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Intergovernmental 7,106,212 7,122,552           8,818,479           8,818,479           -                          0.0% 8,818,479           
Total Local Return Fund 7,292,243$         7,595,334$         8,818,479$         8,818,479$         -$                        0.0% 8,818,479$         
Investment (Interest) 141,270$            318,447$            100,000$            100,000$            -$                        0.0% 100,000$            
Other 419,476 180,575              400,000              400,000              -                          0.0% 400,000              
Total Low & Mod. Housing Asset Fund 560,746$            499,022$            500,000$            500,000$            -$                        0.0% 500,000$            
Property Taxes 1,190,000$         37,053,200$       -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Total Low & Mod. Housing Asset Fund 1,190,000$         37,053,200$       -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Intergovernmental 25,083,829$       11,424,982$       11,888,072$       20,260,312$       8,372,240$         70.4% 14,898,178$       
Other 9,397 116,933              -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Total Misc. Grants Fund 25,093,225$       11,541,915$       11,888,072$       20,260,312$       8,372,240$         70.4% 14,898,178$       
GAS TAX FUND
HOUSING AUTHORITY FUND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES AND REPLACEMENT FUND
LOCAL RETURN FUND
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING ASSET FUND
MISCELLANEOUS GRANTS FUND
MEASURE GS


===== PAGE 141 =====

130
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - FivE-YEAR REvENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27
FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 Revised Proposed Change Change Budget
Fund/Revenue Category Actual Actual Budget Budget Amount Percent Plan
FIVE-YEAR REVENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 to FY 2025-26
Investment (Interest) 4,186$                8,748$                40,000$              5,000$                (35,000)$             -87.5% 5,000$                
Total Parking Authority Fund 4,186$                8,748$                40,000$              5,000$                (35,000)$             -87.5% 5,000$                
Investment (Interest) -$                        -$                        3,000$                3,000$                -$                        0.0% 3,000$                
Total Parks & Rec Facilities Fund -$                        -$                        3,000$                3,000$                -$                        0.0% 3,000$                
Charges for Services 9,076,930$         10,373,587$       9,436,574$         8,894,883$         (541,691)$           -5.7% 8,830,836$         
Investment (Interest) 54,399                185,298              -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Rentals 2,004                  208,617              33,505                110,334              76,829                229.3% 110,334              
Other (2,714) (29,688)               -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Total Pier Fund 9,130,618$         10,737,813$       9,470,079$         9,005,217$         (464,862)$           -4.9% 8,941,170$         
Charges for Services 29,033,038$       35,744,144$       38,656,816$       44,178,372$       5,521,556$         14.3% 47,599,919$       
Investment (Interest) 270,408 539,801 250,000              250,000              -                          0.0% 250,000              
Other 431,438 312,852              461,536              416,486              (45,050)               -9.8% 422,063              
Total RRR Fund 29,734,885$       36,596,797$       39,368,352$       44,844,858$       5,476,506$         13.9% 48,271,982$       
Charges for Services 5,200,000$         4,700,000$         5,200,000$         8,200,000$         3,000,000$         57.7% 9,225,000$         
Investment (Interest) 69,984 95,052 70,000 70,000                -                          0.0% 70,000                
Total Self-Insurance, Bus Fund 5,269,984$         4,795,052$         5,270,000$         8,270,000$         3,000,000$         56.9% 9,295,000$         
Charges for Services 137,428,146$     15,132,114$       17,100,004$       24,000,000$       6,899,996$         40.4% 24,644,000$       
Investment (Interest) 129,308 286,848 155,000 155,000              -                          0.0% 155,000              
Total Self-Ins., Gen Liab. / Auto Fund 137,557,454$     15,418,962$       17,255,004$       24,155,000$       6,899,996$         40.0% 24,799,000$       
Charges for Services 5,357,547$         6,813,725$         7,924,302$         8,723,442$         799,140$            10.1% 9,818,247$         
Total Self-Ins., Risk Mgt.-Admin Fund 5,357,547$         6,813,725$         7,924,302$         8,723,442$         799,140$            10.1% 9,818,247$         
SELF-INSURANCE, BUS FUND
SELF-INSURANCE, GENERAL LIABILITY / AUTO FUND
SELF-INSURANCE, RISK MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATION FUND
RESOURCE RECOVERY AND RECYCLING (RRR) FUND
PARKING AUTHORITY FUND
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES FUND
PIER FUND


===== PAGE 142 =====

131
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - FivE-YEAR REvENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27
FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 Revised Proposed Change Change Budget
Fund/Revenue Category Actual Actual Budget Budget Amount Percent Plan
FIVE-YEAR REVENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 to FY 2025-26
Charges for Services 15,687,328$       13,501,067$       14,000,000$       20,600,000$       6,600,000$         47.1% 20,125,000$       
Investment (Interest) 727,757 1,506,604 770,000 770,000              -                          0.0% 770,000              
Other 15,914 427,122              -                          -                          -                          N/A -                          
Total Self-Ins., Workers' Comp Fund 16,431,000$       15,434,793$       14,770,000$       21,370,000$       6,600,000$         44.7% 20,895,000$       
Investment (Interest) 10,824$              19,314$              10,000$              10,000$              -$                        0.0% 10,000$              
Intergovernmental 151,524              123,374              119,000              122,000              3,000                  2.5% 122,000              
Total SCAQMD AB 2766 Fund 162,348$            142,688$            129,000$            132,000$            3,000$                2.3% 132,000$            
Charges for Services 6,696,307$         624,205$            448,107$            441,000$            (7,107)$               -1.6% 441,000$            
Investment (Interest) 166,352 447,112              -                          200,000              200,000              N/A 200,000              
Rentals 205,487              211,802              230,000              230,000 -                          0.0% 230,000              
Intergovernmental 547,516              -                          547,516              936,510 388,994              71.0% 936,510              
Other 8,783,016 2,785,062           3,824,658           2,459,808           (1,364,850)          -35.7% 2,307,581           
Total Special Revenue Source Fund 16,398,678$       4,068,181$         5,050,281$         4,267,318$         (782,963)$           -15.5% 4,115,091$         
Charges for Services 1,379,997$         1,368,932$         1,660,000$         1,640,000$         (20,000)$             -1.2% 1,640,000$         
Investment (Interest) 93,125 245,583              20,000                50,000                30,000                150.0% 50,000                
Other 2,010,888 501,242              400,000              400,000              -                          0.0% 400,000              
Total Stormwater Management Fund 3,484,010$         2,115,758$         2,080,000$         2,090,000$         10,000$              0.5% 2,090,000$         
Other Local Taxes 17,196$              60,948$              25,000$              25,000$              -$                        0.0% 25,000$              
Investment (Interest) 26,822 51,525 110,000 -                          (110,000)             -100.0% -                          
Other 173,976 43,254                50,000                122,000              72,000                144.0% 122,000              
Total TORCA Fund 217,994$            155,727$            185,000$            147,000$            (38,000)$             -20.5% 147,000$            
Charges for Services 18,271,667$       24,554,508$       20,497,488$       21,559,710$       1,062,222$         5.2% 21,902,696$       
Investment (Interest) 373,591 1,028,873 440,000 440,000 -                          0.0% 440,000
Other 151,208 178,857              150,700              150,700              -                          0.0% 150,700              
Total Vehicle Management Fund 18,796,465$       25,762,238$       21,088,188$       22,150,410$       1,062,222$         5.0% 22,493,396$       
SPECIAL REVENUE SOURCE FUND
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FUND
TENANT OWNERSHIP RIGHTS CHARTER AMENDMENT (TORCA) FUND
VEHICLE MANAGEMENT FUND
SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD) AB 2766 FUND
SELF-INSURANCE, WORKERS' COMPENSATION FUND


===== PAGE 143 =====

132
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - FivE-YEAR REvENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27
FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 Revised Proposed Change Change Budget
Fund/Revenue Category Actual Actual Budget Budget Amount Percent Plan
FIVE-YEAR REVENUE SUMMARY
FY 2024-25 to FY 2025-26
Fines & Forfeitures 2,950$                1,000$                -$                        -$                        -$                        N/A -$                        
Charges for Services 21,115,967 22,090,421 22,974,306 26,682,891 3,708,585           16.1% 29,080,133
Investment (Interest) 414,231 1,006,414 860,000 475,000 (385,000)             -44.8% 475,000
Other 4,759,451 354,760              400,000              400,000              -                          0.0% 400,000              
Total Wastewater Fund 26,292,600$       23,452,596$       24,234,306$       27,557,891$       3,323,585$         13.7% 29,955,133$       
Charges for Services 37,747,817$       40,874,058$       45,045,296$       53,276,458$       8,231,162$         18.3% 61,162,558$       
Investment (Interest) 1,873,247 1,961,422 750,000 300,000 (450,000)             -60.0% 300,000
Other 449,843 575,608              640,000              555,000              (85,000)               -13.3% 555,000              
Total Water Fund 40,070,907$       43,411,087$       46,435,296$       54,131,458$       7,696,162$         16.6% 62,017,558$       
Total All Funds 951,875,011$     868,021,692$     871,215,825$     925,588,157$     54,372,332$       6.2% 974,232,239$     
Less Reimbursements and Transfers (210,441,385)$    (94,681,494)$      (95,750,380)$      (115,372,270)$    (19,621,890)$      20.5% (119,357,376)$    
Grand Total 741,433,626$     773,340,198$     775,465,445$     810,215,887$     34,750,442$       4.5% 854,874,863$     
WATER FUND
ALL FUNDS
WASTEWATER FUND


===== PAGE 144 =====

133
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - OvERviEW
OVERVIEW
Departmental staff works in concert with Finance Department staff to develop revenue projections.  The projections 
reflect a prudent and consistent, approach using established budget practices that reflect the economic impacts 
described in the “Overall Economic Conditions” section of the budget.  Staff considers qualitative and quantitative 
methods of forecasting and uses techniques such as trend analysis, economic indicators, and professional 
judgment, to arrive at the revenue projections.  Revenue forecasting is always one of the most challenging 
aspects in the budget process, with many unknown variables over which the City has little or no control including 
fluctuations in the local, regional, statewide, and national economies; patterns of consumer habits and demands; 
geo-political events, and the fiscal impacts of legislative changes.  
TOTAL CITY REVENUES
Total City revised budgeted revenues for FY 2024-25, after 
adjustments for reimbursements and transfers between funds, 
are $775.5 million reflecting a $2.1 million, or 0.3%, increase 
over FY 2023-24.
FY 2025-26 total City revenues, after adjustments for 
reimbursements and transfers between funds, are projected 
to be $810.2 million, $34.8 million or 4.5% more than the FY 
2024-25 budget. The increase reflects greater General Fund 
revenues ($14.5 million) primarily from various taxes including 
Property, Parking Facility and Business License taxes ($11.1 
million) and revenue from the City’s Digital Wayfinding Kiosk 
program($2.9 million).  Other increases include revenues from the Miscellaneous Grants Fund ($8.4 million) 
reflecting the timing of estimated reimbursement revenues from grant expenses, the Water Fund ($7.7 million) and 
Wastewater Fund ($3.3 million) from projected water and wastewater rate adjustments anticipated to take effect 
in July 2025, the Resource Recovery and Recycling Fund ($5.5 million) from approved solid waste rate adjustments,  
and the Housing Authority Fund ($1.8 million) reflecting increased use and associated funding allocation of 
Federal Housing Choice voucher (Section 8) Program vouchers.  The increases are primarily offset by decreases 
in the Big Blue Bus Fund ($1.5 million) reflecting a decrease in transportation funding allocations from LA Metro 
due to a decline in sales tax revenue, the Beach Fund ($1.1 million) primarily due to reduced parking capacity 
resulting from the planned use of 50% of the 1550 Beach lot for construction staging in preparation for the Pier 
Bridge Replacement project – slated to begin in summer 2026, and the Airport Fund ($1.9 million) due to newly 
negotiated tenant lease credits and anticipated vacancies in commercial buildings and a former Santa Monica 
College building. All other funds are expected to show a net revenue decrease of $1.9 million.  
FY 2026-27 total City revenues, after adjustments for reimbursements and transfers between funds, are projected 
to be $854.9 million, $44.7 million or 5.5% more than in FY 2025-26.  The increase is primarily driven by greater 
General Fund revenues from continued implementation of the Business License Tax rate changes, moderate growth 
in Property Taxes, as well as slight growth in Sales Tax and Transient Occupancy tax from some return of visitors 
$0
$225
$450
$675
$900
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 145 =====

134
and tourism due to anticipated major events in the region ($18.0 million); increases in the Airport Fund ($5.0 
million) as office tenancy is expected to return, increases in the Big Blue Bus Fund ($14.9 million) from increased 
capital project funding, increases in the Resource Recovery and Recycling Fund ($3.4 million) from approved 
solid waste rate adjustments, and increases in the Water Fund ($7.9 million) and Wastewater Fund ($2.4 million) 
reflecting projected water and wastewater rate adjustments.  The increases are primarily offset by a decrease in 
expected grant funding in the Miscellaneous Grants Fund ($5.4 million).  All other funds are expected to show net 
revenue decrease of $1.5 million.
FUND DETAILS
Revenue projections for the next two fiscal years for all City funds are detailed in the section that follows.
GENERAL FUND
 The FY 2024-25 revised revenue budget is $455.9 million, 
$7.0 million (1.6%) more than in FY 2023-24.  The revenue 
projections reflect ongoing challenges in retail, tourism, and 
hospitality—sectors still recovering from the pandemic that 
continue to be impacted by visitor activity and consumer 
spending in Santa Monica. Hybrid work trends have reduced the 
daytime population to about 60% of 2019 levels, contributing to 
higher retail and corporate vacancy rates than regional averages, 
these factors are slowing economic recovery. Additionally, 
international concerns about travel to the U.S. have dampened 
tourism growth. As always, economic uncertainties, including 
inflation, a potential economic downturn from tariffs and 
unforeseen state or federal legislative changes, could further affect the actual tax revenues received. These factors 
are impacting revenues in the General Fund.  
FY 2025-26 total General Fund revenues are projected to be $470.4 million, which is $14.5 million (3.2%) greater 
than the FY 2024-25 revised budget. The increase is primarily from gains in Parking Facility Taxes ($4.1 million) 
due to voter approved Measure K, enacted in January 2025, which increases the PFT by 8% for privately owned 
facilities, Property Taxes ($3.5 million) reflecting a slight softening in the real estate market as interest rates remain 
high, Transient Occupancy Taxes ($3.2 million) reflecting slight increases in tourism levels, increased advertising 
revenue from full implementation of the City’s Digital Wayfinding Kiosk program ($2.9 million), and a net increase 
of $0.8 million from various other sources. 
FY 2026-27 revenues are forecast to be $461.5 million, $17.2 million (3.9%) more than in FY 2025-26. The 
increases are from Transient Occupancy Taxes ($4.6 million) reflecting moderate growth projected for Transient 
Occupancy tax revenue from some return of visitors and tourism due to anticipated major events in the region, 
Property Taxes ($3.7 million) reflecting a more typical  growth of about 3.3% annually, Sales Taxes ($2.0 million) 
reflecting a modest average annual growth of about 3%, Business License taxes ($1.2 million) reflecting tax rate 
changes (from approved Measure F) phased in over three years, other taxes ($1.1 million), and a net increase of 
$4.6 million from  various other revenues.   
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - OvERviEW
$0
$125
$250
$375
$500
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 146 =====

135
General Fund revenues are grouped into the following major revenue categories.  An in-depth review of each of 
these major revenue categories follows:
 • Property Taxes       • Licenses & Permits
 • Sales Taxes       • Fines/Forfeitures
 • Other Taxes       • Charges for Services
  ◊ Utility Users Taxes     • investment income (interest)
  ◊ Transient Occupancy Taxes    • Rent
  ◊ Business Licenses Taxes     • intergovernmental
  ◊ Other Local Taxes     • Other
PROPERTY TAXES
Property Tax revenues result from a 1% levy on the assessed 
value of all real property in the City.  Proposition 13, passed 
by California voters in 1979, specifies that assessed value of 
properties will change at the rate of the Consumer Price index, 
not to exceed 2% per year, unless the property is improved or 
sold, thus establishing a new market value.
The 1% Property Tax levy is collected by the Los Angeles County 
Tax Collector and is distributed to various public agencies located 
in the County, including cities, school districts, and special 
districts.  Santa Monica’s share of the 1% levy is approximately 
14% to 17%, depending on the area of the City where the 
property is located.
The primary component of Property Taxes is taxes secured by real property.  The City also receives unsecured 
property taxes, a reimbursement of homeowners’ exemptions, pass through and residual tax payments related 
to the former Redevelopment Agency (RDA), and an additional levy over the 1% rate used to pay debt service on 
voter approved debt.  Beginning in FY 2004-05, this category also includes property taxes received in exchange for 
lost vehicle License Fee (vLF) revenue resulting from the decrease in the vLF rate per the FY 2004-05 State budget 
(vLF Swap).
The FY 2024-25 revised budget for Property Tax revenues is $2.2 million more than in FY 2023-24, primarily due to 
increases in assessed valuation growth and residual Property Tax payments related to the former RDA. 
Property Taxes are projected to increase in FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 by $3.5 million and $3.7 million, 
respectively, primarily from assessed valuation increases that are expected to continue and greater residual 
Property Tax payments related to the former RDA.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND


===== PAGE 147 =====

136
$0
$20
$40
$60
$80
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
SALES TAXES
The total sales tax rate in Santa Monica is 10.25%.  The rate is 
allocated as follows:
State  6.00% 
Local   1.00% City General Fund
  0.25% To Counties for Transportation Uses
Measure A 0.5%    To Counties to Address Homelessness -   
   effective 4/1/2025
  
Prop A  0.5% 
Prop C  0.5% 
Measure R  0.5% 
Measure M 0.5% 
  
Measures Y 1.00% Measure Y approved by Santa Monica voters in November 2010 added 0.5% and Measure  
and GSH  GSH approved by Santa Monica voters in November 2016 added an additional 0.5% to the  
   rate.   
One half of the Measure Y and GSH Transaction and Use Tax revenues are paid to the Santa Monica-Malibu Unified 
School District for use of certain school district facilities.  Additionally, 25% of the Measure GSH revenues are set 
aside to be used for affordable housing. 
Sales tax revenues are gradually rebounding from pandemic lows and were tracking to exceed pre-COviD levels by 
FY 2024-25. However, due to shifts in consumer spending, slowing tourism and a softening economy FY 2023-24 
experienced a 7.3% decline as compared to FY 2022-23 actuals. The FY 2024-25 revised budget is projected to be 
a modest $2.5 million (nearly 3.4%) over FY 2023-24.
The uncertainties in the economy are anticipated to continue into FY 2025-26, and revenues are projected to be 
flat with FY 2024-25, while increasing  by $2.0 million (2.7%) in FY 2026-27. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND
voter approved debt allocated 
to local agencies from the Los 
Angeles County Metropolitan 
Transit Authority (LACMTA).


===== PAGE 148 =====

137
$0
$20
$40
$60
$80
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
UTILITY USERS TAXES
The City’s 10% Utility Users Tax (UUT) is applied to electricity, 
natural gas, telephone (both hardwire and wireless), cable, and 
water/wastewater services.
FY 2024-25 revised budget revenue projections are  
approximately 3.7% more than in FY 2023-24, primarily due to 
higher energy costs and  increases in electricity and gas rates. 
Utility Users Taxes (UUT) are projected to increase by $0.3 million 
(0.9%) in FY 2025-26 and another $0.5 million in FY 2026-27 
(1.4%) primarily due to anticipated Council-approved water and 
wastewater rate increases, partially offset by the continuing decrease in revenues from telecommunication services 
as consumers shift to more internet-based services which are not subject to the tax.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
The City levies a tax on transient room rentals of 15% for hotel/
motel stays and 17% for homeshare stays. 
Tourism, one of the primary drivers of the City’s economy, 
experienced a fast recovery immediately after the devastating 
impacts of the COviD-19 pandemic. However, lingering effects 
of the pandemic as well as the LA wildfires and geopolitics have 
resulted in a slowed rebound in tourism, projected to reach 
2019 levels only by late 2026 or early 2027. The FY 2024-25 
revised budget is 6.3% more than FY 2023-24 actuals.  The 
increase reflects higher average room rates and occupancy levels, 
although occupancy still lags pre-COviD levels, as international 
and business travel have been slower to recover than domestic leisure travel. 
FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 increases of approximately $3.2 million and $4.6 million, respectively, reflect modest 
increases in the average daily room rate and occupancy. in addition, major sports events coming to the region, 
including the FiFA World Cup in 2026 and the Superbowl in 2027, are expected to attract more visitors to Santa 
Monica.
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND


===== PAGE 149 =====

138
BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES
Businesses operating in the City of Santa Monica are required to 
obtain a business license and pay a tax based on a percentage 
of gross receipts (revenues), the cost of operations, or as a flat 
amount, depending on business type annually.  in most cases, 
the amount of the tax is based on prior calendar year gross  
receipts that are attributable to the business activity conducted 
in Santa Monica. 
in November 2024, voters approved Measure F , which 
modernizes the business license tax provisions of the Santa 
Monica Municipal Code for the first time since 1990. Measure 
F impacts businesses by expanding exemptions, reduced taxes for small property owners, new businesses and 
retailers and restaurants generating less than $5 million in gross revenue annually, and aligned tax rates for  auto 
industry and corporate administrative headquarters  with neighboring jurisdictions. The modernized rates ranges 
from  $1.15 to $5.00 for each $1,000 in gross receipts or cost of operations.
Revenues for FY 2025-26 are expected to decline by approximately 1% ($0.4 million) compared to FY 2024-25 due 
to substantial one-time business license tax payments received in FY 2024-25 and upcoming penalty reductions 
set to take effect next fiscal year. Tax rate increases will be phased in over three years with the final increase being 
implemented in FY 2027-28. FY 2026-27 revenues, projected to increase by 3.3% ($1.3 million) in FY 2026-27, 
reflecting continued implementation of rate changes associated with Measure F .
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 150 =====

139
OTHER TAXES
Other Taxes include: 
Real Property (Documentary) Transfer Tax 
The Documentary Transfer Tax is levied on the sale of real 
property in the City at a rate of $3.00 per $1,000 of transfer 
value for transfers valued under $5 Million.  Per Measure SM, 
approved by Santa Monica voters in November 2020, transfers 
valued $5 million and over are assessed a tax of $6.00 per 
$1,000 of transfer value.  Measure GS, approved by voters in 
November 2022 added a third tier to the tax of $56.00 per 
$1,000 for transfers valued at $8 million and over, effective 
March 1, 2023.  The incremental revenues from the third tier are 
restricted as to use and deposited into the Measure GS Fund.
Vehicle License Fees (VLF) 
The State Budget Act of 2011 ended the allocation of vLF to cities except for a small portion related to certain 
compliance procedures.
Parking Facility Tax 
The Parking Facility Tax of 10% is assessed on private and public parking fees collected in the City. Measure K, 
approved by voters in November 2024, raised the tax rate in private parking lots and structures to 18% effective 
January 1, 2025.
Condominium Tax 
The Condominium Tax of $1,000 per unit is assessed on all new condominium construction and condominium 
conversions in the City.
The FY 2025-26 projected increase of $4.5 million primarily reflects the full year of Parking Facility Taxes.
FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to increase an additional $0.6 million reflecting increased Documentary 
Transfer Taxes as the economy improves while Parking Facility Taxes are expected to level off after full 
implementation of the Measure K tax increase . 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions PFT Real Property


===== PAGE 151 =====

140
LICENSES AND PERMITS
The primary component of the Licenses and Permits revenue 
category is parking revenues, which are a significant revenue 
source affected by visitors.  The pandemic accelerated many 
trends, including online shopping and remote working, that will 
likely impact visitor behavior and decrease parking demand 
in future years. Staff anticipate that demand for parking will 
continue to flatten or decline as consumers adopt alternative 
transportation methods, as well as the increased use of free 
parking in the City’s downtown structures (currently for the first 
90 minutes).  The FY 2024-25 revised revenue budget is about 
2% or $0.6 million above FY 2023-24 actuals.
Revenues are expected to increase slightly in FY 2025-26, resulting in a $0.3 million (0.7%) increase, followed by 
an additional $0.6 million (1.7%) increase in FY 2026-27. The revenue projections do not include the impact of any 
potential parking rate changes that would be presented to the City Council and submitted to the California Coastal 
Commission for approval in late 2025.
FINES AND FORFEITURES
Fines and forfeitures are comprised mainly of parking citation 
fines but also include administrative fines and penalties from 
Code Enforcement and Police Department activities, California 
vehicle code fines, library fines, and other administrative fines. 
in total, the FY 2024-25 revised revenue budget of $14.4 million 
is up approximately 19% from FY 2023-24 reflecting a one-time 
adjustment for prior year revenue.  
Revenues are projected to return to approximately $13.3 million 
in FY 2025-26 and remain relatively flat in FY 2026-27.
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND
$0
$5
$10
$15
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 152 =====

141
$0
$3
$6
$9
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
CHARGES FOR SERVICES
The FY 2024-25 revised revenue budget of $54.2 million is $11.3 
million below FY 2023-24, primarily due to a one-time insurance 
recovery payment received in FY 2023-24 for settlements related 
to sexual abuse claims.  The decreases were partially mitigated 
by new revenues received from the City’s Digital Wayfinding 
Kiosk program, and greater than anticipated revenues related to 
mutual aid deployments by the Fire Department to assist with 
wildfires as part of multiple mutual aid strike team deployments 
and mobile stroke unit special deployments (these are typically 
unbudgeted reimbursements that fluctuate year over year).
Revenues are projected to increase by $3.7 million in FY 2025-
26, primarily due to the advertising revenue from a full year of the Digital Wayfinding Kiosk program. This increase 
is partially offset by a reduction to mutual aid deployment revenues.  
in FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to increase by $1.5 million to $59.4 million primarily due to an increase in 
reimbursements from other funds for general government administrative support, as part of the cost allocation 
plan, based on projected total compensation costs.  
INVESTMENT INCOME
Total investment income represents earnings from the City’s 
pooled investment portfolio (which primarily consists of reserves) 
and bond/loan proceeds.  Revenues are budgeted on a cash basis 
and do not consider unrealized gains or losses.  Additionally, 
interest on bond proceeds is not typically included in the budget 
since it is restricted to the projects for which the bonds were 
issued.  The chart and the discussion exclude unrealized gains 
and losses, other year-end accounting adjustments, and interest 
from bond/loan proceeds.
FY 2024-25 revised budget revenues are $1.4 million less than 
in FY 2023-24. Due to the fluctuations of City investments and 
interest rates, the amount budgeted for interest income is typically conservative. However, with the sharp rise in 
interest rates over the past couple of years, interest income has surpassed the budgeted amount for FY 2024-25. 
 
FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to be flat as compared to FY 2024-25 projected actuals, 
as interest rates have leveled. The overall portfolio yield is expected to increase slightly as many investments 
purchased before the rise in rates will mature and be reinvested at much higher rates of return, however economic 
indicators have indicated there will likely be a lowering of rates over the short-term.
$0
$25
$50
$75
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND


===== PAGE 153 =====

142
$0
$2
$4
$6
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
RENT
The FY 2024-25 revised lease revenue budget of $8.2 million 
is $0.1 million less than FY 2023-24 due to  a dip in outdoor 
dining fees primarily from waivers due to impacts of the LA 
wildfires.
While outdoor dining fee waivers will expire and revenues will 
return to more typical levels, FY 2025-26 revenues are projected 
to remain flat with the prior year due to anticipated vacancies 
impacting lease revenues. 
Revenues are projected to increase by $0.5 million in FY 2026-
27 reflecting more favorable negotiated lease terms.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL
This revenue category is related to reimbursements from other 
government agencies. FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenue 
of $2.3 million is $0.8 million greater than FY 2023-24 due to 
election cost reimbursements from the Santa Monica-Malibu 
Unified School District, the Santa Monica Community College 
District, and the Rent Control Board, which typically occur on a 
biennial basis, as reflected in FY 2026-27 revenues.  
$0
$3
$6
$9
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND


===== PAGE 154 =====

143
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, GENERAL FUND
OTHER REVENUES
The FY 2024-25 revised revenue budget of $3.8 million is $1.1 
million more than in FY 2023-24 primarily due to the discount the 
City receives for pre-paying the full employer share of its CalPERS 
retirement contribution at the beginning of each fiscal year, which 
has resumed after being suspended in FY 2023-24.  
Other revenues are projected to remain relatively flat in FY 2025-
26 and increase by approximately $2.3 million in FY 2026-27. The 
increase is primarily related to anticipated developer payments from 
the Miramar Hotel during the period it is closed for renovation to 
partially offset lost Transient Occupancy Taxes.
$0
$2
$4
$6
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 155 =====

144
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
AIRPORT FUND 
This enterprise fund accounts for revenues and expenses 
connected with management of the Santa Monica Municipal 
Airport and its property.  
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $14.8 million reflect 
a decrease of $4.3 million from FY 2023-24, primarily due to 
unanticipated property vacancies, delays in building renovations, 
tenant improvement credits on newly negotiated leases, and the 
repurposing of a former rental property.
Revenues are projected to decline in FY 2025-26 due to 
the continuation of tenant lease credits and vacancies in 
commercial buildings and a former Santa Monica College building.  Revenues in FY 2026-27 are projected to 
increase by $5.0 million once renovations are complete and lease revenues are reinstated.
BEACH RECREATION FUND
 
This special revenue fund accounts for revenues and expenses 
related to beach parking, recreation activities, concession 
revenues, maintenance, and Beach House operations. Beach 
parking revenues make up approximately 80% of total income 
and are highly dependent on weather conditions and other 
external factors.
For FY 2025-26, proposed budgeted revenues are $15 million, 
reflecting a $1.1 million decrease from FY 2024-25. This decline 
is primarily attributed to the Pier Bridge closure in the summer 
of 2026, which will result in 50% closure of the 1550 Beach 
parking lot for construction staging related to the project.
Revenues for FY 2026-27 are projected to decline further, by an additional $1 million, to $14.8 million, also due 
to the Pier Bridge closure. Staff will revisit rate increases upon completion of the ongoing citywide parking rate 
study. Any adjustments to parking rates will require approval from the California Coastal Commission (CCC), a 
prerequisite for implementation.
$0
$3
$6
$9
$12
$15
$18
$21
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$3
$6
$9
$12
$15
$18
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 156 =====

145
BIG BLUE BUS FUND 
This enterprise fund accounts for operating and capital 
revenues and expenses related to operation of the City's 
municipal bus lines. 
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $122 million are 
$30 million higher than FY 2023-24 primarily due to projected 
reimbursement revenue from funding agencies associated with 
capital project expenses.
FY 2025-26 proposed budgeted revenues of $120.6 million are 
$1.5 million lower than FY 2024-25, primarily due to a decrease 
in the funding allocation by LA Metro as a result of lower than 
anticipated County and State-wide sales tax revenues.
FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to increase by $14.9 million to $135.5 million due to the projected increases in 
funding allocations by LA Metro and reimbursements associated with capital project expenses, which includes the 
procurement of battery-electric buses (BEB) and associated electrical infrastructure.  
CEMETERY FUND
 
This enterprise fund accounts for revenues and expenses 
associated with the operation of the City of Santa Monica 
Woodlawn Cemetery, Mausoleum, and Mortuary.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $2.4 million are $0.2 
million lower than FY 2023-24, reflecting a decrease in cemetery 
and mausoleum-related sales. 
FY 2025-26 revenues are expected to increase by approximately 
$0.3 million to $2.7 million pending fee increases to recover the 
increased cost of landscaping services and other miscellaneous 
costs. 
FY 2026-27 revenues are anticipated to remain relatively flat at $2.8 million. 
 
$0
$20
$40
$60
$80
$100
$120
$140
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$1
$2
$3
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 157 =====

146
CITIZENS' OPTION FOR PUBLIC SAFETY (COPS) FUND
This fund accounts for State-funded revenues and associated 
expenditures for the Citizens' Option for Public Safety (COPS) 
program established per AB 3229 of 1996. 
FY 2025-26 proposed budgeted revenues of $245,000 are 
relatively level with FY 2024-25.  
FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to continue to remain flat 
with FY 2025-26. 
CLEAN BEACHES AND OCEAN PARCEL TAX FUND 
This fund records activity related to implementation of the 
Watershed Management Plan and the passage of Measure v, 
Clean Beaches and Ocean Parcel Tax, in November 2006. The 
assessment rate is subject to annual CPi increases.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $4.7 million are $0.5 
million less than FY 2023-24 due to reduced investment income 
from lower average fund balances contributing to the City’s 
investment pooled portfolio. 
FY 2025-26 revenues are projected to increase by $0.4 million 
to $5.0 million reflecting modest increases in parcel tax revenues subject to CPi adjustments.  
FY 2026-27 revenues are expected to remain relatively level.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Thousands


===== PAGE 158 =====

147
COMMUNITY BROADBAND FUND 
This enterprise fund previously recorded revenues and 
expenses related to the management of Santa Monica CityNet, 
the City’s 100 Gigabit advanced broadband initiative. Effective 
FY 2023-24, the Community Broadband Fund was consolidated 
into the General Fund, realigning the structure of CityNet 
operations as a way to control costs.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT (CDBG) FUND 
 
The Community Development Block Grant (CBDG) Fund 
accounts for Federal entitlements under the Housing and 
Community Development Act of 1974 (as amended).  The City 
Council annually allocates CDBG funds to various programs.
The revenues for the biennial period are projected to remain 
flat at the current funding level of $1.2 million.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$1
$2
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 159 =====

148
GAS TAX FUND 
The Gas Tax Fund collects revenue resulting from a State tax 
on the sale of gasoline in accordance with the provisions of 
the State of California Streets and Highway Code. The State 
of California imposes per-gallon excise taxes on gasoline 
and diesel fuel, sales taxes on gasoline and diesel fuel and 
registration taxes on motor vehicles with allocations dedicated 
to transportation purposes.  Gas Tax funds are used to perform 
citywide repairs and restoration to existing roadways, reduce 
congestion and to improve safety. 
Revenues are expected to remain flat through FY 2026-27, 
based on estimates of the gas tax apportionments from the State.
HOUSING AUTHORITY FUND 
The Housing Authority Fund accounts for the receipt and 
expenditure of Federal funds related to housing programs.
FY 2025-26 proposed budgeted revenues of $30.7 million are 
approximately $2 million higher than FY 2024-25, reflecting an 
increased receipts from utilization of Section 8 vouchers.   
FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to remain relatively flat at 
$30.9, reflecting a slight increase in projected unit utilization 
and expected annual change in the average per unit cost (PUC).
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$2
$4
$6
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$5
$10
$15
$20
$25
$30
$35
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 160 =====

149
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES AND REPLACEMENT FUND
 
This internal service fund receives contributions from City 
departments to finance the City’s annual scheduled expenses 
for replacement of computer equipment, upgrades and 
maintenance of network equipment, enterprise software 
licensing, and the voice and data services that support all 
City projects and programs. These allocations enable the City 
to keep up with improvements in technology and maintain a 
reliable enterprise-wide computer and network environment.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $3.2 million are $0.7 
million higher than FY 2023-24. This reflects the General Fund 
resuming its contributions, which were suspended for two years to address revenue shortfalls from the pandemic. 
FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 revenues align with contribution increases associated with new technology requests 
from departments. 
LOCAL RETURN FUND 
This fund records Prop A and Prop C local return funding from 
MTA. These funds are specific for transportation funding and 
expanding/improving challenges in public transit systems 
throughout LA County. 
FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 proposed budgeted revenues of 
$8.8 million are projected to remain flat with the FY 2024-25 
revised budget based on estimates of funding allocations from 
LA Metro.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$3
$6
$9
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 161 =====

150
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING ASSET FUND
On February 1, 2012, the Redevelopment Agency of the City of 
Santa Monica was dissolved, and its assets were transferred 
to the City as the Successor Agency.  The City, in turn, assigned 
housing assets and functions to the Housing Authority, which 
now maintains prior Redevelopment Low and Moderate income 
Housing Fund assets in the Low and Moderate income Housing 
Asset Fund. 
FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 proposed budgeted revenues of 
$0.5 million are based on previous year actuals and are level 
with the FY 2024-25 revised budget. The projections reflect 
interest earnings and residual receipts from housing projects.   
MEASURE GS FUND
Approved by voters in November 2022 and implemented 
beginning March 1, 2023, Measure GS imposes a real property 
transfer tax rate of $56 per $1,000 for properties sold or 
transferred at $8 million or more. This fund supports two primary 
areas: public education and homelessness prevention and 
affordable housing initiatives in the City of Santa Monica.
 
Annually, the first $10 million in revenue (received during the 
reporting period of March 1 through last day of February) 
supports the Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District 
(SMMUSD), while the next $40 million is allocated to affordable 
housing and homelessness prevention efforts. Revenue beyond $50 million is distributed with 80% allocated to 
housing and homelessness initiatives and 20% to public education.
Given the unpredictability of high-value property sales and the limited historical information available, revenues 
from these transactions are not budgeted. This approach supports a fiscally prudent budgeting strategy, avoiding 
reliance on volatile and unpredictable one-time revenue sources.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$1
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 162 =====

151
MISCELLANEOUS GRANTS FUND 
This fund accounts for the receipt and expenditure of miscellaneous 
federal, state and county awarded grants and special allocations 
provided to the City. 
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $11.9 million reflect new 
grants awarded during the year, including a $3.3 million allocation 
for Samo Bridge, a diversion program that addresses the behavioral 
health, substance abuse, and housing needs of justice-involved 
adults in Santa Monica.
Revenues are projected to increase by $8.4 million to $20.3 million 
in FY 2025-26 and will decrease by $5.4 million to $14.9 million in FY 2026-27, reflecting anticipated grant awards 
and timing of grant expense reimbursements.
PARKING AUTHORITY FUND
The Parking Authority is a financing authority for the City's 
parking structures.  
FY 2025-26 proposed budgeted revenues of $5,000 are $35,000 
below FY 2024-25, which reflects a sharp rise in interest income. 
Revenues for FY 2026-27 are projected to remain flat with FY 
2025-26 to align with historical actuals.
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES FUND 
This fund accounted for funds collected from the Unit Dwelling 
Tax.  Starting in FY 2021-22, no unit dwelling tax is collected, as 
developers of any new projects that would have paid the Unit 
Dwelling Tax are eligible to pay the Parks and Recreation impact 
Fee in lieu of the unit dwelling tax. The impact fee is deposited 
into the Special Revenue Source Fund.  The annual revenue 
currently recorded in this fund reflects investment income only. 
The proposed budget of $3,000 for FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 
remains flat with the revised FY 2024-25 budget.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$1
$2
$3
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Thousands
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Thousands
$0
$5
$10
$15
$20
$25
$30
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 163 =====

152
PIER FUND
This enterprise fund accounts for revenues and expenses related 
to the management, operation, and development of the Santa 
Monica Pier. Lease rental and parking revenues comprise 
approximately 80% of total income. These revenues can be 
highly dependent on weather conditions and other factors, 
including the impacts of the Palisades Fire and directives from 
the Santa Monica Police Department (SMPD) to close portions of 
the Pier Deck.
For FY 2025-26, budgeted revenues total $8.9 million, reflecting 
a $0.5 million decrease from FY 2024-25. This decline is 
primarily due to the closure of the Pier Bridge in the summer of 
2026, which will limit vehicular access to the parking deck.
FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to remain essentially unchanged from FY 2025-26, at $8.8 million.
RESOURCE RECOVERY AND RECYCLING (RRR) FUND 
This enterprise fund accounts for revenues and expenses of 
operating the City's refuse collection, street sweeping and 
cleaning, and recycling programs.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $39.4 million are $2.8 
million higher than FY 2023-24 due to the infusion of one-time 
funds from the closeout of old construction and demolition 
projects.
FY 2025-26 revenues are anticipated to increase by $5.5 million 
and a further $3.4 million in FY 2026-27, primarily from the 
scheduled rate increases that were approved and adopted by Council on June 13, 2023. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$3
$6
$9
$12
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 164 =====

153
SELF-INSURANCE, BUS FUND 
This internal service fund accounts for contributions from the 
Big Blue Bus Fund, and expenses related to the administration 
and payment of bus-related liability claims.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $5.3 million are 
essentially level with FY 2023-24. 
FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27 revenues are projected to be 
$8.3 million and $9.3 million, respectively, based on higher 
contributions required from the Big Blue Bus Fund to ensure 
sufficient fund balance to cover anticipated claim payments.
SELF-INSURANCE, GENERAL LIABILITY/AUTO FUND 
This internal service fund accounts for contributions from other 
funds and expenses related to the administration and payment 
of general liability and automobile liability claims. in FY 2022-
23, the General Fund made a one-time transfer of $122.5 
million for the settlement of several sexual abuse claims. 
Payments of claims are processed from this self insurance fund.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $17.3 million are 
slightly higher  than FY 2023-24 by $1.9 million as a result 
of higher contributions required from all City funds to ensure 
sufficient fund balance to cover claim payments in FY 2024-25. 
Revenues are projected to be $24.2 million in FY 2025-26 and $24.8 million in FY 2026-27, reflecting required 
contribution levels from all City funds to ensure an adequate fund balance for anticipated claim payments. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$20
$40
$60
$80
$100
$120
$140
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 165 =====

154
SELF-INSURANCE, RISK MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATION FUND 
This internal service fund represents contributions from other 
funds for property and other special insurance.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $7.9 million are 
$1.1 million higher than FY 2023-24, reflecting increased 
contributions from other funds for property insurance due to 
rising premiums. 
Revenues are projected to increase to $8.7 million in FY 2025-
26 and then increase to $9.8 million in FY 2026-27, reflecting 
increased contributions required from other funds for property 
insurance to cover the cost of rising premiums. 
SELF-INSURANCE, WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FUND 
This internal service fund accounts for contributions from 
City Departments and expenses related to the administration 
and payment of workers' compensation claims. Fluctuation in 
annual contribution levels from all City funds depends on the 
number and amount of anticipated workers’ compensation 
claims. 
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $14.8 million are 
$0.6 million lower than FY 2023-24, primarily due to a decrease 
in the required contributions to maintain sufficient fund balance 
to cover anticipated claim payments. 
FY 2025-26 revenues are projected to increase by $6.6 million to $21.4 million due to an increase in contributions 
from other City funds to ensure a sufficient fund balance to cover claim payments. FY 2026-27 reflects revised 
contribution amounts to maintain sufficient fund balance.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$6
$12
$18
$24
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 166 =====

155
SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD) 
FUND
This fund accounts for the receipt of Air Quality Management 
District funds and eligible expenditures.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $129,000 are 
approximately $14,000 less than FY 2023-24, reflecting the 
decline in AQMD MSRC Discretionary Funds awarded by the 
California Air Resources Board (CARB).  
FY 2025-27 revenues reflect the City’s projected annual funding 
allocation of $122,000 to remain flat for both years. 
 
SPECIAL REVENUE SOURCE FUND 
in accordance with Government Accounting Standards Board 
Statement 33, this fund records revenues that are restricted, 
committed, or assigned for specific uses. 
One-time payments totaling approximately $12 million 
associated with developer agreements were received in FY 
2022-23.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $5.1 million 
are approximately $1.0 million higher than in FY 2023-24 
primarily due to the receipt of Opioid settlement funds and 
transportation impact fees.  
Revenues are projected to decrease by $0.1 million to $4.3 million in FY 2025-26 and by $0.2 million to $4.1 
million in FY 2026-27, based on the anticipated timing of receipt of fees related to pending development projects 
and fluctuations in Opioid Settlement funds.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$25
$50
$75
$100
$125
$150
$175
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Thousands
$0
$6
$12
$18
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 167 =====

156
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FUND 
FUND
This enterprise fund accounts for revenues and expenses 
associated with stormwater management. The primary source of 
revenue is the stormwater management parcel fee. Additional 
revenues include the sale of recycled water, operating and 
capital cost reimbursements from the City of Los Angeles 
related to the Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility 
(SMURRF) facility, and developer payments. 
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $2.1 million are 
essentially flat to FY 2023-24, reflecting an increase in the 
reimbursement of operating costs associated with the Santa 
Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility (SMURRF) offset by a 
reduction in investment income. 
FY 2025-27 revenues are anticipated to remain level at $2.1 million. 
TENANT OWNERSHIP RIGHTS CHARTER AMENDMENT (TORCA) FUND 
The TORCA Fund accounts for TORCA Conversion Tax revenues 
and expenditures related to various housing programs as 
authorized by Article XX—Tenant Ownership Rights of the 
City Charter. The tax was levied on each conversion, with the 
funds to be used for development and administration of TORCA 
programs, or to assist low to moderate income households.  This 
program was voted into effect in 1984 by Santa Monica voters 
and expired in 1996.
Revenue estimates of $147,000 in FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-
27 reflect the anticipated receipt of TORCA tax revenues from 
previously approved conversions and interest earnings on 
available fund balances.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$75
$150
$225
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Thousands


===== PAGE 168 =====

157
VEHICLE MANAGEMENT FUND 
This internal fund receives payments and contributions from City 
departments to finance the City’s annual scheduled costs for 
vehicle maintenance, fuel, scheduled replacement of vehicles, 
and the operating costs and future fuel station replacements.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $21.1 million are 
$4.7 million lower than FY 2023-24 due to a sharp decline 
in contributions from the other funds as a result of fewer 
enhancement vehicle purchases. 
FY 2025-26 revenues are anticipated to increase by $1.1 million 
over FY 2023-24 and by an additional $0.3 million in FY 2026-
27, reflecting required vehicle replacement contributions and anticipated maintenance payments from other funds.  
 
WASTEWATER FUND 
This enterprise fund accounts for revenues and expenses 
associated with maintaining the sanitary sewer and storm drain 
systems within the City.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $24.2 million are 
expected to be $0.8 million higher than FY 2023-24, reflecting a 
half year of Council-approved rate increases from the prior rate 
study.
Revenues are projected to increase by $3.3 million and $2.4 
million in FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27, respectively, due to the 
projected rate adjustments directed by City Council on March 25, 
2025 and scheduled to be adopted at a public hearing on June 10, 2025.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$5
$10
$15
$20
$25
$30
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$5
$10
$15
$20
$25
$30
$35
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 169 =====

158
WATER FUND 
This enterprise fund accounts for revenues and expenses of 
providing water service to the residents of the City.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted revenues of $46.4 million are $3.0 
million higher than FY 2023-24 due to scheduled water rate 
adjustments. 
Revenues are projected to increase by $7.7 million to $54.1 
million in FY 2025-26 and by an additional $7.9 million to $62.0 
million, reflecting the projected rate adjustments directed by 
Council on March 25, 2025 and scheduled to be adopted at a 
public hearing on June 10, 2025.
 
REIMBURSEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
These are technical adjustments to eliminate double counting of 
certain revenues appearing in two funds and revenues paid by 
one fund to another due for accounting procedures.
The spike in FY 2022-23 is related to the transfer from the 
General Fund to the Self-insurance, General Liability/Auto Fund 
noted above.
FY 2024-25 revised budgeted reimbursements and transfers are 
expected to be $95.8 million, which is 1.1% more than in FY 
2023-24.
Reimbursements and transfers are projected to increase by $19.6 million to $114.9 million in FY 2025-26 and 
further by $4.0 million to $118.9 million in FY 2026-27 primarily due to increases in the required self-insurance 
contributions, such as General Liability / Auto and Workers’ Compensation funds.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
REvENUES - REvENUE ANALYSiS, OTHER FUNDS
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
$60
$70
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions
$0
$75
$150
$225
22-23
Actual
23-24
Actual
24-25
Revised
25-26
Budget
26-27
Budget
in Millions


===== PAGE 170 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES

===== PAGE 171 =====

159
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY BY FUND (FY 2025-26)
Fund Salaries and 
Wages
Supplies and 
Expenses Operating Total Capital 
Improvements Budget Total
General 313,052,908$   152,656,442$   465,709,350$   15,160,829$     480,870,179$       
Airport 2,922,089             9,696,377             12,618,466       8,821,612         21,440,078       
Beach Recreation 6,086,754             11,553,429           17,640,183       797,020            18,437,203       
Big Blue Bus 68,369,553           28,551,299           96,920,852       1,554,939         98,475,791       
Cemetery 1,067,521             1,447,631             2,515,152         339,307                2,854,459         
Citizens Op for Public Safety -                       196,276                196,276            -                       196,276            
Clean Beaches/Ocean Parcel Tax -                       4,510,672             4,510,672         1,600,000             6,110,672         
Community Development Block Grants -                       430,797                430,797            950,000            1,380,797         
Gas Tax -                       2,602,980             2,602,980         2,447,236         5,050,216         
Housing Authority 2,393,239             28,940,459           31,333,698          45,089              31,378,787           
Info Tech Replacement and Services -                       -                       -                       3,203,387         3,203,387             
Local Return -                       1,428,593             1,428,593            8,308,749             9,737,342             
Low/Mod Income Housing Asset -                       400,000                400,000               -                       400,000                
Measure GS -                       490,219                490,219            -                       490,219            
Miscellaneous Grants -                       5,626,385             5,626,385         15,427,214           21,053,599       
Parking Authority 900                       -                       900                   -                       900                   
Pier 2,779,122             5,233,398             8,012,520            100,601                8,113,121             
Resource Recovery & Recycling 15,383,378           24,754,916           40,138,294       5,545,697         45,683,991       
Self-Insurance, Bus -                       5,905,882             5,905,882            -                       5,905,882             
Self-Insurance, Comprehensive -                       11,185,047       11,185,047       -                       11,185,047       
Self-Insurance, Risk Management Admin 2,325,523             6,287,644         8,613,167         36,205                  8,649,372         
Self-Insurance, Workers' Comp -                       16,580,898       16,580,898       -                       16,580,898       
SCAQMD AB 2766 -                       -                       -                       120,000                120,000                
Special Revenue Source -                       (515,918)              (515,918)           1,050,000             534,082            
Stormwater -                       1,388,103             1,388,103         300,000                1,688,103         
TORCA -                       56,367                  56,367              -                       56,367              
Vehicle Management 4,188,955             5,546,784         9,735,739         10,702,415           20,438,154       
Wastewater 3,929,381             15,480,402           19,409,783       15,852,658       35,262,441       
Water 10,667,385       23,205,151       33,872,536       16,133,342       50,005,878       
SUBTOTAL 433,166,708$   363,640,233$   796,806,941$   108,496,300$   905,303,241$       
Reimbursements and Transfers (100,005,680)    (15,366,590)      (115,372,270)       
GRAND TOTAL 433,166,708$   363,640,233$   696,801,261$   93,129,710$     789,930,971$   
FY 2025-26 Expenditure Summary by Fund


===== PAGE 172 =====

160
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY BY FUND (FY 2026-27)
Fund Salaries and 
Wages
Supplies and 
Expenses Operating Total Capital 
Improvements Budget Total
General 319,556,553$   156,712,372$   476,268,925$   19,500,552$     495,769,477$       
Airport 3,009,203         10,074,541           13,083,744       9,365,693         22,449,437       
Beach Recreation 6,246,874             10,913,839           17,160,713       2,284,231         19,444,944       
Big Blue Bus 70,042,039           30,112,555           100,154,594     9,098,643         109,253,237     
Cemetery 1,082,911             1,518,911             2,601,822         341,221            2,943,043         
Citizens Op for Public Safety -                       200,202                200,202            -                       200,202            
Clean Beaches/Ocean Parcel Tax -                       4,589,795             4,589,795         1,150,000         5,739,795         
Community Development Block Grants -                       432,987                432,987            -                       432,987            
Gas Tax -                       2,655,040             2,655,040         2,000,000             4,655,040         
Housing Authority 2,492,699             28,869,527           31,362,226       55,368              31,417,594       
Info Tech Replacement and Services -                       -                       -                       3,680,116         3,680,116         
Local Return -                       1,428,695             1,428,695         4,125,000             5,553,695         
Low/Mod Income Housing Asset -                       400,000                400,000            -                       400,000            
Measure GS -                       519,780                519,780            -                        519,780            
Miscellaneous Grants -                       316,889                316,889            14,161,625       14,478,514       
Parking Authority 900                       -                       900                   -                       900                   
Pier 2,845,195             4,105,763             6,950,958         8,587,442         15,538,400       
Resource Recovery & Recycling 15,831,802           25,515,967           41,347,769       5,554,653         46,902,422       
Self-Insurance, Bus -                       6,310,919             6,310,919         -                       6,310,919         
Self-Insurance, Comprehensive -                       12,018,454       12,018,454       -                       12,018,454       
Self-Insurance, Risk Management Admin 2,381,842         7,325,738         9,707,580         41,674              9,749,254         
Self-Insurance, Workers' Comp -                       17,007,833       17,007,833       -                       17,007,833       
SCAQMD AB 2766 -                       -                       -                        -                       -                        
Special Revenue Source -                       (701,968)           (701,968)           650,000            (51,968)             
Stormwater -                       1,449,608         1,449,608         10,427,942           11,877,550       
TORCA -                       56,494              56,494              -                       56,494              
Vehicle Management 4,286,793         5,728,199         10,014,992       8,243,443         18,258,435       
Wastewater 4,063,920         15,805,380       19,869,300       9,574,902         29,444,202       
Water 11,022,528       23,954,542       34,977,070       25,786,048       60,763,118       
SUBTOTAL 442,863,259$   367,322,062$   810,185,321$   134,628,553$   944,813,874$       
Reimbursements and Transfers (103,332,984)    (16,024,392)      (119,357,376)       
GRAND TOTAL 442,863,259$   367,322,062$   706,852,337$   118,604,161$   825,456,498$       
FY 2026-27 Expenditure Summary by Fund


===== PAGE 173 =====

161
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Operating Budget
City Council 817,519$           924,153$          934,133$           912,822$          (21,311)$           -2.3% 936,857$          
City Manager 11,123,905        11,454,704       13,589,528        13,729,445       139,917            1.0% 14,037,004       
City Attorney 13,619,199        14,597,780       16,105,109        15,385,987       (719,122)           -4.5% 15,656,133       
Records & Elections Services 3,507,397          2,527,544         3,746,095          2,862,614         (883,481)           -14.3% 3,832,826         
Community Development 16,725,014        17,191,945       20,127,470        20,153,954       26,484              0.1% 20,527,406       
Community Services 28,007,878        -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Finance 11,364,792        12,298,604       13,292,769        13,164,297       (128,472)           -1.0% 13,507,308       
Fire Dept 55,316,152        56,356,658       55,021,452        56,641,603       1,620,151         2.9% 57,670,693       
Housing & Human Services -                         20,733,095       23,350,433        23,942,650       592,217            2.5% 25,546,728       
Human Resources 5,711,193          5,470,784         6,604,690          6,880,771         276,081            4.2% 7,048,085         
Information Services 10,360,221        11,841,712       13,574,095        13,713,572       139,477            1.0% 14,034,470       
Library 10,024,867        11,231,695       11,685,698        11,730,813       45,115              0.4% 12,001,944       
Police Dept 110,307,756      115,921,731     120,395,798      130,235,674     9,839,876         8.2% 132,998,877     
Public Works 48,738,092        51,260,290       56,740,650        60,290,751       3,550,101         6.3% 62,037,540       
Recreation & Arts -                         8,860,929         10,710,718        10,995,708       284,990            2.7% 11,221,378       
Santa Monica Department of Transportation 22,417,940        23,390,479       26,253,796        27,260,343       1,006,547         3.8% 27,836,666       
Departmental Operating Budget 348,041,926      364,062,101     392,132,434      407,901,004     15,768,570       4.0% 418,893,915     
Non-Departmental
All Other Transactions 179,214,119      61,835,256       59,095,999        60,623,039       1,527,040         2.6% 57,625,298       
Non-Departmental Operating Budget 179,214,119      61,835,256       59,095,999        60,623,039       1,527,040         2.6% 57,625,298       
Operating Budget Subtotal 527,256,044      425,897,357     451,228,433      468,524,043     17,295,610       3.8% 476,519,213     
Interfund Transfers (51,388,751)       (5,260,313)       834,695             (2,814,693)        (3,649,388)        -437.2% (250,288)           
Operating Budget Total 475,867,293      420,637,045     452,063,128      465,709,350     13,646,222       3.0% 476,268,925     
Capital Budget 23,141,497        18,130,603       35,355,165        15,160,829       (20,194,336)     -57.1% 19,500,552       
Sub-Total 499,008,790      438,767,647     487,418,293      480,870,179     (6,548,114)        -1.3% 495,769,477     
Less Reappropriated Capital b
20,754,513        
Total General Fund 499,008,790$    438,767,647$   466,663,780$    480,870,179$   14,206,399$     3.0% 495,769,477$   
b. Reappropriated Capital represents capital projects fully budgeted in prior fiscal years that are still underway; these are financed using associated fund reserves.
GENERAL FUND
a. FY 2024-25 Revised Budget differs from amounts presented in the Adopted FY 2024-25 City Budget due to Council-approved budget changes throughout the fiscal year.
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual


===== PAGE 174 =====

162
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual
Operating Budget 8,643,719          12,505,666       11,254,320        11,847,153       592,833            5.3% 12,292,925       
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 7,631                 6,987                863                    907                   44                     5.1% 953                   
Interfund Transfers 402,456             629,728            776,461             770,406            (6,055)               -0.8% 789,866            
Capital Budget 4,432,754          14,219,504       27,625,860        8,821,612         (18,804,248)     -68.1% 9,365,693         
Sub-Total 13,486,560        27,361,885       39,657,504        21,440,078       (18,217,426)     -45.9% 22,449,437       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
11,480,374        
Total Airport Fund 13,486,560$      27,361,885$     28,177,130$      21,440,078$     (6,737,052)$     -23.9% 22,449,437$     
Operating Budget 125,620             -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Sub-Total 125,620             -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         
Total Asset Seizure Fund 125,620$           -$                      -$                       -$                      -$                      N/A -$                      
Operating Budget 17,182,403        18,414,387       18,843,664        20,936,321       2,092,657         11.1% 21,563,384       
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 24,614               23,981              29,578               31,057              1,479                5.0% 32,610              
Interfund Transfers 108,640             (2,689,033)       (2,483,664)         (3,327,195)        (843,531)           34.0% (4,435,281)        
Capital Budget 613,032             1,027,269         3,660,594          797,020            (2,863,574)        -78.2% 2,284,231         
Sub-Total 17,928,689        16,776,604       20,050,172        18,437,203       (1,612,969)        -8.0% 19,444,944       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
2,363,574          -                        
Total Beach Recreation Fund 17,928,689$      16,776,604$     17,686,598$      18,437,203$     750,605$          4.2% 19,444,944$     
Operating Budget 76,913,129        77,307,297       91,790,543        97,036,795       5,246,252         5.7% 100,242,595     
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 377,503             395,110            309,469             324,942            15,473              5.0% 341,189            
Interfund Transfers (67,324)              449,795            (391,932)            (440,885)           (48,953)             12.5% (429,190)           
Capital Budget 12,201,346        13,880,864       69,688,642        1,554,939         (68,133,703)     -97.8% 9,098,643         
Sub-Total 89,424,654        92,033,066       161,396,722      98,475,791       (62,920,931)     -39.0% 109,253,237     
Less Reappropriated Capital b
69,310,223        -                        
Total Big Blue Bus Fund 89,424,654$      92,033,066$     92,086,499$      98,475,791$     6,389,292$       6.9% 109,253,237$   
BEACH RECREATION FUND
AIRPORT FUND
BIG BLUE BUS FUND
ASSET SEIZURE FUND


===== PAGE 175 =====

163
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual
Operating Budget 2,263,568          2,333,836         2,851,144          2,890,616         39,472              1.4% 2,977,231         
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) (6,060)                1,055                -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Interfund Transfers (504,313)            (581,840)           (375,660)            (375,464)           196                   -0.1% (375,409)           
Capital Budget 126,323             217,074            673,866             339,307            (334,559)           -49.6% 341,221            
Sub-Total 1,879,519          1,970,125         3,149,350          2,854,459         (294,891)           -9.4% 2,943,043         
Less Reappropriated Capital b
136,122             -                        
Total Cemetery Fund 1,879,519$        1,970,125$       3,013,228$        2,854,459$       (158,769)$         -5.3% 2,943,043$       
Operating Budget 135,159             87,685              109,094             196,276            87,182              79.9% 200,202            
Sub-Total 135,159             87,685              109,094             196,276            87,182              79.9% 200,202            
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         -                        
Total COPS Fund 135,159$           87,685$            109,094$           196,276$          87,182$            79.9% 200,202$          
Operating Budget 547,427             536,198            816,097             1,020,965         204,868            25.1% 1,043,005         
Interfund Transfers 898,460             3,899,703         3,515,894          3,489,707         (26,187)             -0.7% 3,546,790         
Capital Budget 601,298             218,275            11,202,588        1,600,000         (9,602,588)        -85.7% 1,150,000         
Sub-Total 2,047,185          4,654,177         15,534,579        6,110,672         (9,423,907)        -60.7% 5,739,795         
Less Reappropriated Capital b
3,937,588          -                        
Total Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund 2,047,185$        4,654,177$       11,596,991$      6,110,672$       (5,486,319)$     -47.3% 5,739,795$       
Operating Budget 1,809,399          -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 3,069                 -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Interfund Transfers 222,000             -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Capital Budget 1,728                 -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Sub-Total 2,036,196          -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         -                        
Total Community Broadband Fund 2,036,196$        -$                      -$                       -$                      -$                      N/A -$                      
Operating Budget 170,312             94,900              189,800             189,800            -                        0.0% 189,800            
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 14,942               30,937              157,350             109,497            (47,853)             -30.4% 111,687            
Interfund Transfers 123,040             92,328              131,500             131,500            -                        0.0% 131,500            
Capital Budget 245,541             262,833            3,294,605          950,000            (2,344,605)        -71.2% -                        
Sub-Total 553,834             480,997            3,773,255          1,380,797         (2,392,458)        -63.4% 432,987            
Less Reappropriated Capital b
1,005,338          -                        
Total CDBG Fund 553,834$           480,997$          2,767,917$        1,380,797$       (1,387,120)$     -50.1% 432,987$          
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANTS (CDBG) FUND
COPS FUND
CLEAN BEACHES & OCEAN PARCEL TAX FUND
CEMETERY FUND
COMMUNITY BROADBAND FUND


===== PAGE 176 =====

164
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 5,497                 5,527                5,474                 5,583                109                   2.0% 5,695                
Interfund Transfers 2,331,348          2,518,580         2,683,495          2,597,397         (86,098)             -3.2% 2,649,345         
Capital Budget 1,323,193          656,953            9,897,541          2,447,236         (7,450,305)        -75.3% 2,000,000         
Sub-Total 3,660,037          3,181,060         12,586,510        5,050,216         (7,536,294)        -59.9% 4,655,040         
Less Reappropriated Capital b
6,397,541          -                        
Total Gas Tax Fund 3,660,037$        3,181,060$       6,188,969$        5,050,216$       (1,138,753)$     -18.4% 4,655,040$       
Operating Budget 26,752,447        27,393,478       29,451,304        30,768,674       1,317,370         4.5% 30,779,256       
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) -                         276,893            -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Interfund Transfers (71,657)              273,967            353,897             565,024            211,127            59.7% 582,970            
Capital Budget 12,371               12,371              43,333               45,089              1,756                4.1% 55,368              
Sub-Total 26,693,161        27,956,709       29,848,534        31,378,787       1,530,253         5.1% 31,417,594       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         -                        
Total Housing Authority Fund 26,693,161$      27,956,709$     29,848,534$      31,378,787$     1,530,253$       5.1% 31,417,594$     
Interfund Transfers -                         (761,063)           -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Capital Budget 3,146,270          3,470,716         4,007,866          3,203,387         (804,479)           -20.1% 3,680,116         
Sub-Total 3,146,270          2,709,653         4,007,866          3,203,387         (804,479)           -20.1% 3,680,116         
Less Reappropriated Capital b
939,452             -                        
Total Info Tech Replacement & Services Fund 3,146,270$        2,709,653$       3,068,414$        3,203,387$       134,973$          4.4% 3,680,116$       
Operating Budget 357,175             136,406            352,563             204,600            (147,963)           -42.0% 204,600            
Interfund Transfers 704,730             641,712            1,223,893          1,223,993         100                   0.0% 1,224,095         
Capital Budget 5,087,899          1,594,447         18,497,284        8,308,749         (10,188,535)     -55.1% 4,125,000         
Sub-Total 6,149,804          2,372,565         20,073,740        9,737,342         (10,336,398)     -51.5% 5,553,695         
Less Reappropriated Capital b
11,497,284        -                        
Total Local Return Fund 6,149,804$        2,372,565$       8,576,456$        9,737,342$       1,160,886$       13.5% 5,553,695$       
Interfund Transfers 411,564             180,575            389,364             400,000            10,636              2.7% 400,000            
Sub-Total 411,564             180,575            389,364             400,000            10,636              2.7% 400,000            
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         
Total Low & Mod Income Housing Asset Fund 411,564$           180,575$          389,364$           400,000$          10,636$            2.7% 400,000$          
HOUSING AUTHORITY FUND
GAS TAX FUND
LOCAL RETURN FUND
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING ASSET FUND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY REPLACEMENT & SERVICES FUND


===== PAGE 177 =====

165
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 1,190,000          18,810,000       16,917,629        -                        (16,917,629)     -100.0% -                        
Interfund Transfers -                         -                        139,493             490,219            350,726            251.4% 519,780            
Sub-Total 1,190,000          18,810,000       17,057,122        490,219            (16,566,903)     -97.1% 519,780            
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         -                        
Total Housing Authority Fund 1,190,000$        18,810,000$     17,057,122$      490,219$          (16,566,903)$   -97.1% 519,780$          
Operating Budget 4,146,770          6,015,752         7,408,797          5,206,167         (2,202,630)        -29.7% -                        
Interfund Transfers 912,126             974,278            398,418             420,218            21,800              5.5% 316,889            
Capital Budget 13,080,594        4,976,571         27,827,559        15,427,214       (12,400,345)     -44.6% 14,161,625       
Sub-Total 18,139,490        11,966,601       35,634,774        21,053,599       (14,581,175)     -40.9% 14,478,514       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
18,133,142        
Total Miscellaneous Grants Fund 18,139,490$      11,966,601$     17,501,632$      21,053,599$     3,551,967$       20.3% 14,478,514$     
Operating Budget 950                    350                   900                    900                   -                        0.0% 900                   
Capital Budget 37,962               1,291                313,371             -                        (313,371)           -100.0% -                        
Sub-Total 38,912               1,641                314,271             900                   (313,371)           -99.7% 900                   
Less Reappropriated Capital b
313,371             
Total Parking Authority Fund 38,912$             1,641$              900$                  900$                 -$                      0.0% 900$                 
Capital Budget 5,770                 -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Sub-Total 5,770                 -                        -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         
Total Parks & Recreation Fund 5,770$               -$                      -$                       -$                      -$                      N/A -$                      
Operating Budget 7,975,978          8,330,984         8,354,369          8,464,250         109,881            1.3% 8,749,560         
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 11,351               11,653              9,917                 10,413              496                   5.0% 10,934              
Interfund Transfers (2,999,508)         (724,809)           (3,570,382)         (462,143)           3,108,239         -87.1% (1,809,536)        
Capital Budget 477,471             1,901,760         9,614,148          100,601            (9,513,547)        -99.0% 8,587,442         
Sub-Total 5,465,293          9,519,588         14,408,052        8,113,121         (6,294,931)        -43.7% 15,538,400       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
8,292,475          
Total Pier Fund 5,465,293$        9,519,588$       6,115,577$        8,113,121$       1,997,544$       32.7% 15,538,400$     
MEASURE GS FUND
PIER FUND
PARKS AND RECREATION FUND
PARKING AUTHORITY FUND
MISCELLANEOUS GRANTS FUND


===== PAGE 178 =====

166
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual
Operating Budget 26,815,000        29,386,957       36,010,018        38,741,863       2,731,845         7.6% 39,934,128       
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 105,855             107,073            94,189               98,899              4,710                5.0% 103,844            
Interfund Transfers 1,083,309          1,298,770         1,220,015          1,297,532         77,517              6.4% 1,309,797         
Capital Budget 5,604,750          9,441,618         6,381,264          5,545,697         (835,567)           -13.1% 5,554,653         
Sub-Total 33,608,914        40,234,419       43,705,486        45,683,991       1,978,505         4.5% 46,902,422       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
1,141,524          
Total Resource Recovery & Recycling Fund 33,608,914$      40,234,419$     42,563,962$      45,683,991$     3,120,029$       7.3% 46,902,422$     
Operating Budget 8,565,173          4,802,605         4,919,717          5,425,082         505,365            10.3% 5,820,503         
Interfund Transfers 405,224             440,713            471,373             480,800            9,427                2.0% 490,416            
Sub-Total 8,970,397          5,243,318         5,391,090          5,905,882         514,792            9.5% 6,310,919         
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         
Total Self-Insurance, Bus Fund 8,970,397$        5,243,318$       5,391,090$        5,905,882$       514,792$          9.5% 6,310,919$       
Operating Budget 137,996,867      16,977,308       9,432,411          10,509,861       1,077,450         11.4% 11,329,764       
Interfund Transfers 584,307             646,434            661,947             675,186            13,239              2.0% 688,690            
Sub-Total 138,581,173      17,623,743       10,094,358        11,185,047       1,090,689         10.8% 12,018,454       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         
Total Self-Insurance, Comprehensive Fund 138,581,173$    17,623,743$     10,094,358$      11,185,047$     1,090,689$       10.8% 12,018,454$     
Operating Budget 7,855,509          9,887,499         8,474,671          11,681,251       3,206,580         37.8% 12,836,636       
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 16,603               16,652              24,882               18,729              (6,153)               -24.7% 19,665              
Interfund Transfers (2,556,186)         (2,904,635)       (2,987,662)         (3,086,813)        (99,151)             3.3% (3,148,721)        
Capital Budget 34,148               34,188              34,694               36,205              1,511                4.4% 41,674              
Sub-Total 5,350,074          7,033,704         5,546,585          8,649,372         3,102,787         55.9% 9,749,254         
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         
Total Self-Insurance, Risk Mgmt Admin Fund 5,350,074$        7,033,704$       5,546,585$        8,649,372$       3,102,787$       55.9% 9,749,254$       
Operating Budget 7,567,886          17,142,601       14,047,485        14,628,554       581,069            4.1% 15,016,442       
Interfund Transfers 8,222,199          1,895,896         1,914,063          1,952,344         38,281              2.0% 1,991,391         
Capital Budget -                         -                        1,665,900          -                        (1,665,900)        -100.0% -                        
Sub-Total 15,790,085        19,038,497       17,627,448        16,580,898       (1,046,550)        -5.9% 17,007,833       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
-                         
Total Self-Insurance, Workers' Comp Fund 15,790,085$      19,038,497$     17,627,448$      16,580,898$     (1,046,550)$     -5.9% 17,007,833$     
RESOURCE RECOVERY & RECYCLING FUND
SELF-INSURANCE, COMPREHENSIVE FUND
SELF-INSURANCE, BUS FUND
SELF-INSURANCE, RISK MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATION FUND
SELF-INSURANCE, WORKERS' COMPENSATION FUND


===== PAGE 179 =====

167
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 7,613                 7,765                -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Capital Budget 75,413               730,944            217,804             120,000            (97,804)             -44.9% -                        
Sub-Total 83,026               738,709            217,804             120,000            (97,804)             -44.9% -                        
Less Reappropriated Capital b
147,804             
Total SCAQMD AB 2766 Fund 83,026$             738,709$          70,000$             120,000$          50,000$            71.4% -$                      
Operating Budget 2,746,733          2,521,359         4,194,423          4,208,597         14,174              0.3% 4,223,055         
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) -                         575,564            -                         -                        -                        N/A -                        
Interfund Transfers 22,888,247        (1,080,170)       (5,839,881)         (4,724,515)        1,115,366         -19.1% (4,925,023)        
Capital Budget 2,146,867          4,125,826         9,803,765          1,050,000         (8,753,765)        -89.3% 650,000            
Sub-Total 27,781,847        6,142,580         8,158,307          534,082            (7,624,225)        -93.5% (51,968)             
Less Reappropriated Capital b
8,703,765          
Total Special Revenue Source Fund 27,781,847$      6,142,580$       (545,458)$          534,082$          1,079,540$       -197.9% (51,968)$           
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 106,248             49,854              38,178               40,434              2,256                5.9% 42,794              
Interfund Transfers 1,473,362          1,093,784         1,393,187          1,347,669         (45,518)             -3.3% 1,406,814         
Capital Budget 108,043             5,886                11,250               300,000            288,750            2566.7% 10,427,942       
Sub-Total 1,687,652          1,149,524         1,442,615          1,688,103         245,488            17.0% 11,877,550       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
11,250               
Total Stormwater Management Fund 1,687,652$        1,149,524$       1,431,365$        1,688,103$       256,738$          17.9% 11,877,550$     
Operating Budget -                         -                        6,242                 6,367                125                   2.0% 6,494                
Interfund Transfers 179,976             24,030              116,472             50,000              (66,472)             -57.1% 50,000              
Capital Budget 904,381             4,566                1,010,403          -                        (1,010,403)        -100.0% -                        
Sub-Total 1,084,357          28,596              1,133,117          56,367              (1,076,750)        -95.0% 56,494              
Less Reappropriated Capital b
1,010,403          
Total TORCA Fund 1,084,357$        28,596$            122,714$           56,367$            (66,347)$           -54.1% 56,494$            
Operating Budget 8,269,722          8,775,828         9,757,732          9,700,214         (57,518)             -0.6% 9,977,742         
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 38,042               38,105              28,519               29,945              1,426                5.0% 31,442              
Interfund Transfers -                         403                   4,874                 5,580                706                   14.5% 5,808                
Capital Budget 2,378,251          5,140,032         40,270,511        10,702,415       (29,568,096)     -73.4% 8,243,443         
Sub-Total 10,686,016        13,954,367       50,061,636        20,438,154       (29,623,482)     -59.2% 18,258,435       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
33,763,418        
Total Vehicle Management Fund 10,686,016$      13,954,367$     16,298,218$      20,438,154$     4,139,936$       25.4% 18,258,435$     
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FUND
SCAQMD AB 2766 FUND
TORCA FUND
SPECIAL REVENUE SOURCE FUND
VEHICLE MANAGEMENT FUND 


===== PAGE 180 =====

168
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
EXPENDiTURES - FivE-YEAR EXPENDiTURE SUMMARY
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
FUND/DEPARTMENT BUDGET UNIT
Five-Year Expenditure Summary
FY 2022-23
Actual
FY 2024-25
Revised
 Budget a
FY 2025-26
Proposed
Budget
Change 
Amount
(4) - (3)
Change 
Percent
(5) / (3)
FY 2026-27 
Budget
Plan
FY 2023-24
Actual
Operating Budget 12,487,404        15,586,559       21,163,089        22,186,954       1,023,865         4.8% 22,730,353       
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 29,908               30,733              18,877               19,821              944                   5.0% 20,812              
Interfund Transfers (142,584)            (2,987,021)       (2,459,852)         (2,796,992)        (337,140)           13.7% (2,881,865)        
Capital Budget 7,475,483          6,485,669         15,120,931        15,852,658       731,727            4.8% 9,574,902         
Sub-Total 19,850,211        19,115,940       33,843,045        35,262,441       1,419,396         4.2% 29,444,202       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
5,416,505          
Total Wastewater Fund 19,850,211$      19,115,940$     28,426,540$      35,262,441$     6,835,901$       24.0% 29,444,202$     
Operating Budget 31,661,957        33,344,057       30,890,952        32,300,988       1,410,036         4.6% 33,384,910       
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 72,232               73,612              49,169               51,628              2,459                5.0% 54,209              
Interfund Transfers 16,107,923        1,121,260         1,259,431          1,519,920         260,489            20.7% 1,537,951         
Capital Budget 48,109,676        27,526,026       36,840,483        16,133,342       (20,707,141)     -56.2% 25,786,048       
Sub-Total 95,951,788        62,064,955       69,040,035        50,005,878       (19,034,157)     -27.6% 60,763,118       
Less Reappropriated Capital b
20,877,981        
Total Water Fund 95,951,788$      62,064,955$     48,162,054$      50,005,878$     1,843,824$       3.8% 60,763,118$     
Operating Budget 739,032,234      655,643,814     702,451,769      736,053,252     33,601,483       4.8% 752,397,400     
All Other Transactions (Non-Departmental) 181,219,166      82,296,758       76,780,093        61,364,894       (15,415,199)     -20.1% 58,401,132       
Interfund Transfers (671,413)            (806,927)           (620,561)            (611,205)           9,356                -1.5% (613,211)           
Capital Budget 131,372,061      114,065,284     333,059,427      108,496,300     (224,563,127)   -67.4% 134,628,553     
Sub-Total 1,050,952,048   851,198,928     1,111,670,728   905,303,241     (206,367,487)   -18.6% 944,813,874     
Less Reappropriated Capital b
225,633,647      
Total All Funds 1,050,952,048   851,198,928     886,037,081      905,303,241     19,266,160$     2.2% 944,813,874     
Less Reimbursements and Transfers
Operating (198,298,928)     (76,560,953)     (81,069,538)       (100,005,680)    (18,936,142)     23.4% (103,332,984)    
Capital (12,142,457)       (18,120,541)     (14,680,842)       (15,366,590)      (685,748)           4.7% (16,024,392)      
GRAND TOTAL 840,510,664$    756,517,435$   790,286,701$    789,930,971$   (355,730)$         0.0% 825,456,498$   
WASTEWATER FUND
WATER FUND
ALL FUNDS


===== PAGE 181 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES

===== PAGE 182 =====

169
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - CiTY COUNCiL
CITY COUNCIL
The mission of the City Council is to adopt 
legislation and provide direction to the 
administration of the City and to promote 
the best interests of the community locally 
and with other governmental agencies. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
This section presents a description of each department, its mission and the services provided 
by its divisions. it identifies how department projects, programs, and initiatives align with and 
contribute to positive outcomes. it also identifies the divisional expenditure budget and related 
positions.
City Council
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 509,911$            596,488$            636,868$            615,557$            639,592$            
Supplies and Expenses 307,608              327,665              297,265              297,265              297,265              
Subtotal 817,519              924,153              934,133              912,822              936,857              
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 509,911              596,488              636,868              615,557              639,592              
Supplies and Expenses 307,608              327,665              297,265              297,265              297,265              
Total Department 817,519$            924,153$            934,133$            912,822$            936,857$            
City Council
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
Temporary Staffing 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
 Total Personnel & Staffing 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0


===== PAGE 183 =====

170
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - CiTY COUNCiL
SERVICE BY DIVISION
The City Council provides leadership in establishing policies for the conduct of municipal affairs while acting 
as the principal policymakers for the City; oversees the delivery of basic City services; formulates community 
priorities for allocation of City resources; and holds regularly scheduled meetings, hearings, and study sessions 
to receive citizens’ input and conduct City business in a public forum. Staff manages constituent services and 
the City’s legislative and intergovernmental affairs programs and provides Council members with scheduling, 
communications and other administrative support. 


===== PAGE 184 =====

171
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - CiTY MANAGER
CITY MANAGER
The City Manager’s Office leads the team 
of City departments and staff to implement 
the Council’s vision based on Council 
priorities and direction. The Department’s 
mission is to foster collaboration and 
innovation across the City, guided by 
the values of accountability, equity, 
inclusion, innovation, resilience, safety, and 
stewardship. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
CMO
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 9,558,880$         10,062,060$       11,417,701$       11,519,913$       11,820,954$       
Supplies and Expenses 1,565,025           1,392,644           2,171,827           2,209,532           2,216,050           
Subtotal 11,123,905         11,454,704         13,589,528         13,729,445         14,037,004         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          -                          725,000              -                          -                          
Subtotal -                          -                          725,000              -                          -                          
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 9,558,880           10,062,060         11,417,701         11,519,913         11,820,954         
Supplies and Expenses 1,565,025           1,392,644           2,896,827           2,209,532           2,216,050           
Total Department 11,123,905$       11,454,704$       14,314,528$       13,729,445$       14,037,004$       
CMO
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 55.0 56.0 57.0 57.0 57.0
Temporary Staffing 1.4 1.4 1.0 1.0 1.0
 Total Personnel & Staffing 56.4 57.4 58.0 58.0 58.0


===== PAGE 185 =====

172
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - CiTY MANAGER
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION 
The Administration Division is responsible for supporting the departments in their efforts to provide efficient and 
cost-effective City programs and policies. The Division oversees major City-initiated projects, coordinates policy 
development, advocates for City priorities and programs, provides guidance on the annual budget process, and 
manages the City Council agendas.  in addition to these functions, the Administration Division houses five teams: 
• 311 Customer Service provides centralized customer response for all non-public safety services via in 
person, phone, web and mobile app in multiple languages; 
• Community Partnerships oversees public-private partnerships and other revenue-generating initiatives, and 
manages relationships with key City partners; 
• Diversity, Equity and inclusion works to advance racial equity and social diversity to improve the wellbeing 
of people who live, work, play, and do business in our City; 
• Public information provides real-time, accurate and critical information to residents, businesses and 
visitors throughout the city on a variety of key topics. The team handles all digital and print communication 
channels, manages media relations and outreach, covers government meetings and produces city videos;   
• Policy and Legislative Affairs advances the Council’s legislative platform through work with City lobbyists 
and supports the development of City policy recommendations supporting Council priorities. 
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
The Office of Emergency Management (OEM) is responsible 
for the City’s emergency response and planning efforts 
including mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery 
to community-wide hazards and disaster events. OEM 
is made up of two divisions. The Emergency Services 
Division implements extensive disaster planning, training, 
and proactive community-based disaster preparedness 
programs to ensure that the City of Santa Monica is a 
disaster resilient community. Emergency Services also 
oversees the operation of the City’s Emergency Operation 
Center (EOC). The Public Safety Communications Division 
is responsible for providing communications services to the 
police and fire departments, including answering 911 and 
non-emergency telephone calls, dispatching public safety 
resources, and providing emergency medical dispatch 
services. 


===== PAGE 186 =====

173
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - CiTY ATTORNEY
CITY ATTORNEY
The City Attorney’s Office provides the City 
Council, City Manager, City Clerk, and staff 
with the highest quality legal services. The 
services the office provides are objective, 
timely, comprehensive, vigorous, and fair. 
Prosecutors diligently, compassionately, 
and justly enforce the law on behalf of 
the People of the State of California. in all 
functions, the office is ethical and cost-
effective in promoting the community's 
interests in equity, justice, and fairness. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
CAO
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 11,966,796$       13,596,057$       13,317,820$       14,392,285$       14,652,358$       
Supplies and Expenses 1,652,403           1,001,723           2,787,289           993,702              1,003,775           
Subtotal 13,619,199         14,597,780         16,105,109         15,385,987         15,656,133         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          -                          3,351,850           4,183,530           -                          
Subtotal -                          -                          3,351,850           4,183,530           -                          
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 11,966,796         13,596,057         13,317,820         14,392,285         14,652,358         
Supplies and Expenses 1,652,403           1,001,723           6,139,139           5,177,232           1,003,775           
Total Department 13,619,199$       14,597,780$       19,456,959$       19,569,517$       15,656,133$       
CAO
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 44.0 44.0 45.0 45.0 45.0
Temporary Staffing 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
 Total Personnel & Staffing 44.5 44.5 45.5 45.5 45.5


===== PAGE 187 =====

174
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION
The Administrative Unit supports the work of the entire office. Among other things, administrative staff manages 
the office budget including grants, procurement, citywide legal contracts, and invoices; respond to PRA requests; 
continuing legal education and print and online publications; conference rooms, criminal inquiry calls, restitution, 
office mail, public inquiries, general email requests, 311 emails, and staff requests; office personnel matters 
including collaboration with the Chiefs of each Unit; all human resource functions including recruitment, 
onboarding, offboarding, and retention; technology management including hardware, software, and the City 
website; management of facilities and supplies; organization of workplace recognitions and celebrations; and the 
City Attorney's Office ongoing response to health and safety issues. 
ADVISORY UNIT   
The Advisory Unit provides legal advice on a wide range of issues to the City Council, the City’s boards and 
commissions, and all City staff. The unit drafts and reviews ordinances, resolutions, contracts, leases, memos, and 
other legal documents.  The unit also handles land use, constitutional, and other specialized litigation, including 
appeals; and oversees personnel issues and investigations.  
CONSUMER PROTECTION UNIT  
The Consumer Protection Unit litigates tenant 
and consumer protection cases, including 
bringing affirmative litigation to enforce federal, 
state, and local housing discrimination, tenant 
harassment, and unfair business practice laws, 
and defending the City in litigation challenging 
tenant and consumer protection programs. The 
unit also prosecutes code violations, handling 
administrative appeals and pursuing criminal 
and nuisance abatement actions. Through civil, 
administrative, and criminal actions, the unit 
enforces building and fire codes; state and local 
laws regulating nuisances, contractors, businesses, 
and alcohol serving establishments; zoning; historic 
resources; signs; minimum wage and other worker 
protections; business licensing; and tenant relocation. The unit also advises the Code Enforcement Division and the 
Housing Division and educates the community on their tenant and consumer rights.    
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - CiTY ATTORNEY


===== PAGE 188 =====

175
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - CiTY ATTORNEY
CRIMINAL PROSECUTION UNIT   
The Criminal Prosecution Unit represents the People 
in misdemeanor criminal matters, many of which 
used to be considered felony crimes. Prosecuted 
offenses range from Penal Code violations, such 
as driving under the influence, assault, theft, and 
domestic violence, to violations of the Santa Monica 
Municiple code. Most cases are referred by the Santa 
Monica Police Department, but cases also come from 
other law enforcement agencies such as LASD, CHP , 
UCLAPD, SMCPD, ABC, and Fish and Game.  The unit 
assists victims of crime (especially victims of domestic 
violence) by providing support prior to and in court 
proceedings, connecting victims to available resources, 
and processing restitution payments. The unit also 
staffs the City's STEP Court which is a  diversion 
programs designed to address and remedy underlying 
causes of homelessness such as drug addiction and 
mental health. 
LITIGATION UNIT   
The work of the Litigation Unit is as varied and complex as the City’s operations. The unit defends the City in state 
and federal court against personal injury, property damage, employment, and civil rights lawsuits covering nearly 
every aspect of the operations of Big Blue Bus, Public Works, Community Development, Community Services, 
Human Resources, Police, and Fire Departments, and more. Litigators work closely with City staff, shepherding 
employees through the legal process from discovery to trial and appeal. The unit also initiates litigation to obtain 
monetary recovery for the City from third party individuals and entities and responds to third-parties subpoenas for 
citywide. While civil lawsuits focus on past events, the unit also works closely with Risk Management to provide 
preventive legal advice based on experience. Attorneys make recommendations with the goal of improving safety 
and reducing claims. 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES BY FRAMEWORK OUTCOME


===== PAGE 189 =====

176
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - RECORDS AND ELECTiON SERviCES (CiTY CLERK)
RECORDS AND ELECTION 
SERVICES (CITY CLERK)
To serve and empower all Santa Monica 
community members in upholding our local 
government’s democratic processes with 
transparency and integrity by facilitating 
fair and impartial elections, open public 
meetings, public records requests, and 
providing internal mail and printing services.  
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
RES
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,961,084$         1,893,580$         2,166,381$         2,088,660$         2,155,470$         
Supplies and Expenses 1,546,313           633,963              1,579,714           773,954              1,677,356           
Subtotal 3,507,397           2,527,543           3,746,095           2,862,614           3,832,826           
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 1,961,084           1,893,580           2,166,381           2,088,660           2,155,470           
Supplies and Expenses 1,546,313           633,963              1,579,714           773,954              1,677,356           
Total Department 3,507,397$         2,527,543$         3,746,095$         2,862,614$         3,832,826$         
RES
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 12.0 13.0 13.0 13.0 13.0
Temporary Staffing 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
 Total Personnel & Staffing 12.0 13.0 13.0 13.0 13.0


===== PAGE 190 =====

177
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION 
The Administration Division carries out the official duties of the City Clerk as required by local law and the Brown 
Act (Open Meetings Law), Public Records Act and Political Reform Act. The Division prepares and disseminates 
the City Council meeting agenda and packets; maintains the City’s legislative history for the City Council, 
Redevelopment Successor Agency, and Public Finance, Housing and Parking Authorities. Additionally, Division 
staff serve as the Board Secretaries of the Audit Subcommittee, Clean Beaches & Ocean Oversight Committee, 
and Transient Occupancy Tax Advisory Committee. The office also maintains the City’s Boards/Commissions 
Appointments List, Lobbyist Registry and Council’s Oaks initiative Log; administers the Records Management 
Program; and attests to contracts executed by the City Manager.
ELECTIONS 
The City Clerk serves as the City’s Elections Official and Filing Officer as required by local and State Election Codes 
and the State Political Reform Act. The Division conducts special municipal elections, coordinates consolidated 
regular City Council, Rent Control Board, Santa Monica – Malibu Unified School District (SMMUSD) Board and 
Santa Monica City College (SMCC) Board elections with the Los Angeles County Clerk/Registrar-Recorder, and 
maintains the official election records. The Division is staffed by Administration and Support Services personnel. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - RECORDS AND ELECTiON SERviCES (CiTY CLERK)


===== PAGE 191 =====

178
SUPPORT SERVICES 
The Support Services Division provides internal 
support to City staff and provides all City 
departments with high quality reprographic 
services and efficient internal and external mail 
service. Support Services personnel also provide 
additional staffing for Administration and Election 
events. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - RECORDS AND ELECTiON SERviCES (CiTY CLERK)


===== PAGE 192 =====

179
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - COMMUNiTY DEvELOPMENT
COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT
The mission of the Community 
Development Department is focused on the 
built environment and the encouragement 
and expansion of economic opportunities 
for businesses and residents. The 
department facilitates new investment 
and encourages economic activity by 
introducing code amendments to streamline 
the land use entitlement process and 
review for development applications 
consistent with the City’s adopted land 
use policies. The department ensures 
that development projects comply with 
applicable standards, project design reflects 
the City’s aesthetic character, and historic 
resources are protected. The Department 
is also responsible for development 
review, plan check, building inspections, 
code enforcement, implementing City real 
estate transactions, promoting economic 
sustainability, serving as liaison to the 
business districts, managing leasing and 
licensing of City property, operating the 
Santa Monica Farmers Markets, managing 
the Santa Monica Beach and Pier, and 
administering the wind-down of the former 
Redevelopment Agency. 


===== PAGE 193 =====

180
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES -  COMMUNiTY DEvELOPMENT
CDD
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 14,593,666$       15,143,036$       16,956,774$       16,836,575$       17,191,163$       
Supplies and Expenses 2,131,348           2,048,909           3,170,696           3,317,379           3,336,243           
Subtotal 16,725,014         17,191,945         20,127,470         20,153,954         20,527,406         
Beach Fund
Supplies and Expenses 8,009,396           8,401,044           8,339,491           -                          -                          
Subtotal 8,009,396           8,401,044           8,339,491           -                          -                          
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 138,024              73,031                -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 138,024              73,031                -                          -                          -                          
Pier Fund
Salaries and Wages 355,938              379,570              393,595              391,787              398,964              
Supplies and Expenses 2,554,644           2,836,323           2,841,586           2,932,994           3,084,341           
Subtotal 2,910,582           3,215,893           3,235,181           3,324,781           3,483,305           
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 20,510                7,045                  -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 20,510                7,045                  -                          -                          -                          
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 14,949,604         15,522,606         17,350,369         17,228,362         17,590,127         
Supplies and Expenses 12,853,922         13,366,352         14,351,773         6,250,373           6,420,584           
Total Department 27,803,526$       28,888,958$       31,702,142$       23,478,735$       24,010,711$       
CDD
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 84.2 89.2 89.2 89.2 89.2
Temporary Staffing 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
 Total Personnel & Staffing 85.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0


===== PAGE 194 =====

181
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES -  COMMUNiTY DEvELOPMENT
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION 
The Administration Division coordinates and manages the Department’s four other divisions: Building and Safety, 
City Planning, Code Enforcement, and Economic Development. Responsibilities include providing direction and 
leadership to the Department, coordinating the winddown of the former Redevelopment Agency's activities, 
monitoring staff report preparation, coordination of personnel issues, reviewing and coordinating responses to 
City Council/citizen inquiries, budget preparation and fiscal tracking, coordinating inter-departmental collaborative 
objectives, coordinating responses to regional planning initiatives, and researching and analyzing data for 
inclusion in reports and special studies. 
BUILDING AND SAFETY 
The Building and Safety Division ensures the safe construction and occupancy of buildings by verifying compliance 
with California building standards through the application and enforcement of State laws and City ordinances 
governing the construction, use, and maintenance of structures on private and public property throughout the City. 
in this capacity, the Building and Safety Division administers Federal, State, and Municipal regulations regarding 
architectural compliance, structural stability, seismic safety, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, disabled access, 
energy conservation, green building, and tenant protection during construction. Services provided by the Building 
and Safety Division include public counter permitting operations, plan review, inspections, and maintenance of 
permit and construction records. Additionally, the division administers the locally implemented mandatory Seismic 
Retrofit Program, where nearly 2,000 buildings were identified as potentially seismically vulnerable in need of 
seismic retrofit and required to comply with the Program. 
CITY PLANNING 
The City Planning Division develops long-range plans and 
policies that shape the built environment of Santa Monica to 
address community priorities and changing conditions.  The 
Division is also responsible for administering and implementing 
the Zoning Ordinance, ensuring compliance with housing 
policies, promoting urban design principles, managing the City’s 
historic preservation program, and coordinating environmental 
review in compliance with the California Environmental Quality 
Act. The Division reviews project applications to ensure that 
future development is in compliance with the City’s land use 
regulations and conducts development agreement negotiations.  
The Division staffs the Planning Commission, Landmarks 
Commission, and Architectural Review Board. 


===== PAGE 195 =====

182
CODE ENFORCEMENT 
The Code Enforcement Division ensures that both residents 
and businesses within the City adhere to Federal, State, and 
Municipal codes by responding to reported code violations, as 
well as conducting proactive enforcement. The Division responds 
to violations involving construction work, substandard housing, 
noise, and property maintenance. They also investigate planning 
and zoning violations, including adherence to conditional 
use permit requirements. The Division may take enforcement 
action to compel compliance, including issuing notices of 
violation or administrative citations. The Code Enforcement 
Division strives to form partnerships within the community 
and routinely participates in educational sessions during 
neighborhood meetings. Major Code Enforcement initiatives 
include addressing short-term rentals, vacant properties, and the 
Directed Action Response Team (DART) which monitors sidewalk 
vendors, pedicabs, street performers, and food trucks along the 
Pier, beach and downtown areas. 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
The Economic Development Division is focused on creating a 
sustainable, equitable and inclusive economy in Santa Monica 
and continues to lead the Citywide economic recovery effort. 
The Division manages leasing of the City’s real estate assets 
including the Bergamot Station Arts Center and Pier properties, 
the Outdoor Dining program, supports the Downtown Santa 
Monica revitalization efforts, oversees the Buy Local Santa 
Monica Campaign and annual Most Loved Santa Monica 
Businesses Contest, and provides technical assistance to City 
departments in lease negotiation, property management, 
and property reuse and development. The Division oversees 
administration of the Santa Monica Beach and Pier, including 
management of the multi-departmental funds and coordinates 
with community partners to enhance the visitor experience 
at the Santa Monica Beach and Municipal Pier, and manages 
four weekly Santa Monica Farmers Markets. Additionally, the 
Division acts as a liaison and provides technical support to Santa 
Monica’s several business organizations, including Downtown 
Santa Monica inc., the Santa Monica Chamber of Commerce, 
Santa Monica Travel and Tourism, Santa Monica Pier Corporation, 
and business improvement districts. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES -  COMMUNiTY DEvELOPMENT


===== PAGE 196 =====

183
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - FiNANCE
FINANCE
The mission of the Finance Department is 
to provide sound business, financial, and 
risk management support to internal and 
external customers, ensuring continuation 
of public services to the residents, visitors, 
and businesses of Santa Monica through 
the protection of financial resources. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
FIN
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 9,023,360$         9,063,514$         10,034,055$       9,742,845$         10,076,841$       
Supplies and Expenses 2,341,432           3,235,090           3,258,714           3,421,452           3,430,467           
Subtotal 11,364,792         12,298,604         13,292,769         13,164,297         13,507,308         
Self-insurance, Risk Management Administration Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,798,169           2,006,605           2,158,806           2,306,794           2,362,177           
Supplies and Expenses 6,057,340           7,880,894           6,315,865           9,374,457           10,474,459         
Subtotal 7,855,509           9,887,499           8,474,671           11,681,251         12,836,636         
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 10,821,529         11,070,119         12,192,861         12,049,639         12,439,018         
Supplies and Expenses 8,398,772           11,115,984         9,574,579           12,795,909         13,904,926         
Total Department 19,220,301$       22,186,103$       21,767,440$       24,845,548$       26,343,944$       
FIN
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 66.3 67.3 67.5 68.5 68.5
Temporary Staffing 0.0 0.5 0.5 0.0 0.0
 Total Personnel & Staffing 66.3 67.7 68.0 68.5 68.5


===== PAGE 197 =====

184
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION 
The Administration Division is responsible for financial 
strategic planning, providing overall long-range 
financial projections, managing the City’s investment 
porfolio and managing debt issuance and compliance. 
in addition, the Division is responsible for directing 
the Department’s divisions, coordinating personnel 
activities, staff reports, budgets and fiscal tracking, and 
responding to inquiries from the public. The Division 
also staffs the Audit Subcommittee, administers the 
internal audit function, and staffs the Measure CS 
Advisory Committee.  
BUDGET  
The Budget Division is responsible for developing and 
monitoring the City’s multi-year budget; preparing 
the long-term financial forecast and periodic financial 
status updates; developing and implementing budget 
policies, systems, and procedures; and providing 
budgetary guidance and support to City departments.  
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS 
The Financial Operations Division is responsible for the City’s financial reporting; accounts payable; payroll; grants 
monitoring; and management, maintenance, and development of the City’s Enterprise Resource Planning software 
and other financial systems. Division staff coordinates with the City’s independent auditors and other auditors to 
complete numerous financial and compliance audits and produce required financial reports to be submitted to 
numerous regulatory agencies, including the Annual Comprehensive Financial Report and the Single Audit Report.  
PROCUREMENT 
The Procurement Division is responsible for the acquisition of goods and services needed to support City 
operations, developing and implementing procurement policies and procedures, and for providing procurement 
and contract administration guidance and support to City departments. Procurement coordinates with City 
departments to ensure procurement efforts meet necessary standards and are in compliance with City policy and 
State law, assuring fair and equal opportunity to all qualified suppliers in support of the delivery of public services. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - FiNANCE


===== PAGE 198 =====

185
REVENUE 
The Revenue Division is responsible for the management of the City’s cash balances and its relationships with 
banking institutions, management of  debit issuance and  ensuring delinquent debts are collected, supporting the 
Finance Director in administration of the City’s investment portfolio, administration and enforcement  of  local  
tax ordinances including issuance of business licenses and regulatory permits, billing and collection processes 
for  residential and commercial water, sewer and sanitation fees and charges;  counting and processing daily cash 
collections of parking meter and transit fare-box revenue.  
RISK MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATION 
The Risk Management Division is responsible for ensuring the City has sufficient insurance in place to cover all 
liability, workers’ compensation, and property losses; adjusting all liability and most of the workers’ compensation 
claims filed against the City; implementing policies and procedures across the organization to reduce the City’s 
exposure to unnecessary liability, workers’ compensation and property losses; and coordinating the City’s efforts to 
comply with local, state, and federal safety regulations. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - FiNANCE


===== PAGE 199 =====

186
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - FiRE
FIRE
We believe in helping people by preserving 
and improving the safety, health, and 
wellbeing of our community. We provide 
collaborative and innovative fire protection, 
emergency medical care, and life safety 
services. We make a difference every day.
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
FIRE
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 51,221,453$       51,808,240$       50,524,740$       52,319,375$       53,176,948$       
Supplies and Expenses 4,094,700           4,548,419           4,496,712           4,322,228           4,493,745           
Subtotal 55,316,153         56,356,659         55,021,452         56,641,603         57,670,693         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,747,547           1,851,924           228,155              -                          -                          
Subtotal 1,747,547           1,851,924           228,155              -                          -                          
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 7,005                  7,355                  15,606                15,918                16,236                
Subtotal 7,005                  7,355                  15,606                15,918                16,236                
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 51,221,453         51,808,240         50,524,740         52,319,375         53,176,948         
Supplies and Expenses 5,849,252           6,407,698           4,740,473           4,338,146           4,509,981           
Total Department 57,070,705$       58,215,938$       55,265,213$       56,657,521$       57,686,929$       
FIRE
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 138.0 137.0 137.0 138.0 138.0
Temporary Staffing 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.0
 Total Personnel & Staffing 138.0 137.4 137.4 138.0 138.0


===== PAGE 200 =====

187
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION DIVISION 
The Fire Chief and administrative staff are 
responsible for establishing and implementing 
policy and procedures, implementing and 
evaluating the 2023-2028 Strategic Plan, 
establishing goals and objectives, analyzing 
outcomes, and managing capital improvement 
projects. Additionally, the administrative staff 
is responsible for oversight of all logistical 
functions related to the departments 
preparation for emergency response. This 
includes fleet, facilities, communications, 
and iT-related hardware and software. 
Administration works closely with Public 
Works to maintain the department’s five 
fire stations and the fire department offices in the Public Safety Facility. Administration also works with the 
Department of Transportation under a maintenance agreement to ensure that Fire apparatus and heavy duty 
vehicles are kept in excellent working condition through scheduled preventative maintenance and timely repairs 
and service.  
PREVENTION DIVISION 
The Fire Prevention division is responsible for 
developing and implementing programs that prevent 
or reduce the magnitude of emergencies, such as loss 
of life and property, personal injury, or environmental 
damage. Prevention recommends and implements 
ordinances, reviews plans, processes complaints, 
and enforces codes, ordinances and laws through 
inspection of new construction and existing buildings. 
Prevention works with other City agencies, such as 
the Police Department, the Community Development 
Department, and the City Attorney’s Office to advocate 
for new or revised laws, where appropriate, that better ensure life and building safety. Prevention evaluates 
provisions for emergency access, building evacuation, confinement of fires, and potential for hazardous materials 
releases. Prevention also enforces State laws regarding health care, penal, public assembly, high-rise facilities, 
and environmental regulations relating to hazardous materials. Additionally, Prevention provides public safety 
education to the schools, community members, and City employees in fire safety and disaster assistance response 
training. Prevention is also responsible for the SMFD’s social media. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - FiRE


===== PAGE 201 =====

188
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - FiRE
SUPPRESSION AND RESCUE DIVISION 
The Fire Suppression and Rescue Division is responsible for responding to and effectively mitigating fire, medical, 
urban search and rescue, aircraft rescue firefighting, accident, and hazardous materials-related emergencies. 
Suppression also conducts an extensive evaluation of its preparedness status, provides training and recertification 
of its personnel in the specialty fields of hazardous materials and urban search and rescue, evaluates potential 
building hazards, and plans mitigation tactics. Suppression also conducts residential inspections, provides public 
education, and maintains facilities, apparatus, and equipment. 
TRAINING DIVISION 
The Training Division is responsible for providing and managing training for each Fire Department division, 
including recruitment programs and a recruit training academy for newly hired firefighters. This division 
coordinates and controls the training calendar for all divisions. Training activities cover career development; 
evaluation for retention of job skills, knowledge, abilities and team effectiveness; specialized and new information 
or procedures; monitoring of cyclic training recertification programs; post stress incident debriefing; classroom and 
field training; physical fitness programs; and training outside the City or Department.  


===== PAGE 202 =====

189
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DIVISION  
The Emergency Medical Services (EMS) division is dedicated to delivering high-quality emergency medical care and 
ensuring the health, safety, and well-being of our community. The team of highly trained paramedics, emergency 
medical technicians, and support staff provide a rapid, compassionate response to a wide range of medical 
emergencies. EMS is responsible for developing and implementing emergency medical protocols, managing 
EMS licenses and certifications, providing continuing education training, performing quality improvement, and 
maintaining critical medical supplies. EMS also collaborates closely with the Police Department’s Homeless Liaison 
Program and the City’s Housing and Human Services Division, as well as the Los Angeles County Emergency 
Medical Services Agency to address evolving medical needs, optimize pre-hospital care, and provide better care for 
the City’s vulnerable population.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - FiRE


===== PAGE 203 =====

190
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - HOUSiNG AND HUMAN SERviCES 
HOUSING AND HUMAN 
SERVICES 
The Housing and Human Services 
Department (HHS) coordinates Santa 
Monica’s social services safety net and 
manages the City’s affordable housing 
programs, including the Santa Monica 
Housing Authority, which administers 
housing voucher programs. Our department 
includes an array of housing, homelessness 
prevention and intervention services to 
support underserved populations, and 
provides upstream investments in children 
and youth via programming (CREST, virginia 
Avenue Park, Police Activities League) and 
our ongoing collaboration and partnership 
with Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School 
District and Santa Monica College. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
HHS
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 6,432,666$         8,160,566$         9,880,004$         10,097,474$       10,471,594$       
Supplies and Expenses 11,642,566         12,572,529         13,470,429         13,845,176         15,075,134         
Subtotal 18,075,232         20,733,095         23,350,433         23,942,650         25,546,728         
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 170,312              94,900                189,800              189,800              189,800              
Subtotal 170,312              94,900                189,800              189,800              189,800              
Housing Authority Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,634,134           1,981,191           2,328,336           2,393,239           2,492,699           
Supplies and Expenses 25,118,313         25,412,287         27,122,968         28,375,435         28,286,557         
Subtotal 26,752,447         27,393,478         29,451,304         30,768,674         30,779,256         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 906,028              2,112,801           2,167,844           965,637              -                          
Subtotal 906,028              2,112,801           2,167,844           965,637              -                          
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,330,234           1,833,528           3,485,690           3,485,690           3,485,690           
Subtotal 1,330,234           1,833,528           3,485,690           3,485,690           3,485,690           
TORCA Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          -                          6,242                  6,367                  6,494                  
Subtotal -                          -                          6,242                  6,367                  6,494                  
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 8,066,800           10,141,757         12,208,340         12,490,713         12,964,293         
Supplies and Expenses 39,167,453         42,026,045         46,442,973         46,868,105         47,043,675         
Total Department 47,234,253$       52,167,802$       58,651,313$       59,358,818$       60,007,968$       


===== PAGE 204 =====

191
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - HOUSiNG AND HUMAN SERviCES 
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION DIVISION   
The Administration Division guides departmental activities 
to ensure access to housing and human services that 
meet the needs and priorities of the community, leads 
development of the department’s budget and financial 
reporting, coordinates its communication and marketing 
outreach. 
HOUSING DIVISION  
The Housing Division manages a robust array of housing programs 
that address the needs of households struggling with housing 
stability and affordability. The Division administers project and tenant-
based voucher programs, manages production and preservation of 
affordable housing, and performs compliance monitoring of existing 
affordable housing. Collaborating with community stakeholders 
and partners, as well as with public and private lenders, developers 
and service providers, the Division works to ensure low-income and 
vulnerable community members have access to income and rental 
support through the City’s Housing Authority to prevent homelessness 
and help individuals and families thrive.  
HHS
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 6,432,666$         8,160,566$         9,880,004$         10,097,474$       10,471,594$       
Supplies and Expenses 11,642,566         12,572,529         13,470,429         13,845,176         15,075,134         
Subtotal 18,075,232         20,733,095         23,350,433         23,942,650         25,546,728         
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 170,312              94,900                189,800              189,800              189,800              
Subtotal 170,312              94,900                189,800              189,800              189,800              
Housing Authority Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,634,134           1,981,191           2,328,336           2,393,239           2,492,699           
Supplies and Expenses 25,118,313         25,412,287         27,122,968         28,375,435         28,286,557         
Subtotal 26,752,447         27,393,478         29,451,304         30,768,674         30,779,256         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 906,028              2,112,801           2,167,844           965,637              -                          
Subtotal 906,028              2,112,801           2,167,844           965,637              -                          
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,330,234           1,833,528           3,485,690           3,485,690           3,485,690           
Subtotal 1,330,234           1,833,528           3,485,690           3,485,690           3,485,690           
TORCA Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          -                          6,242                  6,367                  6,494                  
Subtotal -                          -                          6,242                  6,367                  6,494                  
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 8,066,800           10,141,757         12,208,340         12,490,713         12,964,293         
Supplies and Expenses 39,167,453         42,026,045         46,442,973         46,868,105         47,043,675         
Total Department 47,234,253$       52,167,802$       58,651,313$       59,358,818$       60,007,968$       
HHS
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 6,432,666$         8,160,566$         9,880,004$         10,097,474$       10,471,594$       
Supplies and Expenses 11,642,566         12,572,529         13,470,429         13,845,176         15,075,134         
Subtotal 18,075,232         20,733,095         23,350,433         23,942,650         25,546,728         
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 170,312              94,900                189,800              189,800              189,800              
Subtotal 170,312              94,900                189,800              189,800              189,800              
Housing Authority Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,634,134           1,981,191           2,328,336           2,393,239           2,492,699           
Supplies and Expenses 25,118,313         25,412,287         27,122,968         28,375,435         28,286,557         
Subtotal 26,752,447         27,393,478         29,451,304         30,768,674         30,779,256         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 906,028              2,112,801           2,167,844           965,637              -                          
Subtotal 906,028              2,112,801           2,167,844           965,637              -                          
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,330,234           1,833,528           3,485,690           3,485,690           3,485,690           
Subtotal 1,330,234           1,833,528           3,485,690           3,485,690           3,485,690           
TORCA Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          -                          6,242                  6,367                  6,494                  
Subtotal -                          -                          6,242                  6,367                  6,494                  
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 8,066,800           10,141,757         12,208,340         12,490,713         12,964,293         
Supplies and Expenses 39,167,453         42,026,045         46,442,973         46,868,105         47,043,675         
Total Department 47,234,253$       52,167,802$       58,651,313$       59,358,818$       60,007,968$       
HHS
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 0.0 75.0 76.0 78.3 78.3
Temporary Staffing 0.0 8.2 8.2 8.2 8.2
 Total Personnel & Staffing 0.0 83.2 84.2 86.4 86.4


===== PAGE 205 =====

192
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - HOUSiNG AND HUMAN SERviCES 
HUMAN SERVICES DIVISION (HSD)  
The Human Services Division (HSD) manages an extensive 
portfolio of essential community resources and services 
that equitably address the economic and basic needs of 
vulnerable youth and families and low-income adults. 
Additionally, the division provides direct services through 
school and community-based educational and cultural 
programs and events via virginia Avenue Park, the Police 
Activities League, and through the CREST Program. HSD 
collaborates with community stakeholders, local education 
institutions (Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District 
and Santa Monica College),  and service providers to 
ensure low-income and vulnerable community members 
have access to an array of coordinated, high-quality safety 
net services funded through the City’s Human Services 
Grants Program.    
HOMELESSNESS PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION DIVISION (HPI)   
Manages a diverse and full spectrum of resources 
and services that focus on preventing and addressing 
homelessness, as well as providing services to people 
with disabilities and seniors. HPi collaborates with 
local non-profit providers and regional partners that 
administer the City’s network of homeless services 
that connect vulnerable populations to interim and 
permanent housing solutions and other supports. 
HPi promotes alignment across stakeholders within 
the homelessness response system that includes 
measurable outcomes. The division is responsible 
for oversight of the Homelessness Management 
information System (HMiS), the City’s Homelessness 
Strategic Plan, and the Santa Monica Aging & Disability 
Action Plan.   
 


===== PAGE 206 =====

193
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - HUMAN RESOURCES
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
HUMAN RESOURCES
The mission of the Human Resources 
Department is to attract and retain top 
talent through innovative and strategic 
recruitment while delivering exceptional 
service and support to every employee and 
potential employee of the City of Santa 
Monica. 
HR
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 4,935,191$         4,917,509$         5,335,118$         5,386,884$         5,545,842$         
Supplies and Expenses 776,002              553,274              1,269,572           1,493,887           1,502,243           
Subtotal 5,711,193           5,470,783           6,604,690           6,880,771           7,048,085           
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 4,935,191           4,917,509           5,335,118           5,386,884           5,545,842           
Supplies and Expenses 776,002              553,274              1,269,572           1,493,887           1,502,243           
Total Department 5,711,193$         5,470,783$         6,604,690$         6,880,771$         7,048,085$         
HR
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 27.0 26.0 27.0 27.0 27.0
Temporary Staffing 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
 Total Personnel & Staffing 27.0 26.0 27.0 27.0 27.0


===== PAGE 207 =====

194
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - HUMAN RESOURCES
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
The Administrative Services Division provides leadership, 
administrative oversight, and support to all the divisions 
of the Human Resources Department. Functions of the 
Administrative Services Division include: Establishing 
policy and processes to ensure City compliance 
with State and Federal employment laws and MOU 
provisions; administration of the HR/Payroll system 
and maintenance of employee records, compensation, 
and demographic data; oversee position management 
and implementation of negotiated salary and benefit 
changes as a result of Council direction and approved 
budgets; departmental budget preparation and fiscal 
tracking; management of the department’s records 
retention; and the facilitation of the Santa Monica 
Personnel Board.  
EMPLOYMENT, CLASSIFICATION, AND BENEFITS  
The Employment and Classification Division is responsible for administering talent acquisition strategies designed 
to attract and retain a highly qualified and diverse workforce that is well equipped to anticipate and respond to 
the changing needs of Santa Monica’s residents, visitors, and business community. This includes the administration 
of all recruitment, selection, and certification of qualified candidates in support of City departments. The Division 
also manages the City’s job classification and compensation plans, including conducting studies to ensure 
positions are appropriately classified and compensated to meet the operational needs of City departments. 
Division staff serve as business partners using a consultative approach with City departments when delivering 
business services to assist them in meeting their staffing needs as well as serving the public in their search for 
career opportunities with the City of Santa Monica.  The Division also administers, coordinates, and provides 
information related to employee health benefits, employee wellness, deferred compensation, and retirement. 


===== PAGE 208 =====

195
LEARNING, LABOR AND EMPLOYEE RELATIONS  
The Learning, Labor and Employee Relations Division negotiates and administers labor agreements with the 
City’s various employee associations; provides assistance to departments regarding employee performance 
issues and disciplinary matters; investigates employee complaints. Additionally, the division administers the 
interactive/reasonable accommodation process and monitors compliance of various leave programs such as the 
Family and Medical Leave (FMLA) and California Family Rights (CFRA) Acts. The Division also facilitates training, 
organizational development and employee engagement opportunities.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - HUMAN RESOURCES


===== PAGE 209 =====

196
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - iNFORMATiON SERviCES
INFORMATION SERVICES
The mission of the information Services 
Department is to leverage technology in 
support of responsive City services and 
an exceptional digital experience for the 
people of Santa Monica. Our vision: through 
technology we empower people, connect 
community, and craft solutions to support 
a digitally literate City that works for 
everyone. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
ISD
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 8,702,053$         9,350,824$         10,457,992$       10,697,034$       11,011,616$       
Supplies and Expenses 1,658,168           2,490,888           3,116,103           3,016,538           3,022,854           
Subtotal 10,360,221         11,841,712         13,574,095         13,713,572         14,034,470         
Community Broadband Fund
Salaries and Wages 981,558              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses 827,841              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 1,809,399           -                          -                          -                          -                          
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 152,313              851,602              -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 152,313              851,602              -                          -                          -                          
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 9,683,611           9,350,824           10,457,992         10,697,034         11,011,616         
Supplies and Expenses 2,638,322           3,342,490           3,116,103           3,016,538           3,022,854           
Total Department 12,321,933$       12,693,314$       13,574,095$       13,713,572$       14,034,470$       
ISD
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 52.0 53.0 53.0 52.0 52.0
Temporary Staffing 0.5 0.5 0.5 1.4 1.4
 Total Personnel & Staffing 52.5 53.5 53.5 53.4 53.4


===== PAGE 210 =====

197
SERVICE BY DIVISION
STRATEGY AND OPERATIONS 
The Strategy and Operations Division manages business operations and administrative functions, provides project 
management oversight, delivers technology training, and oversees the City’s cyber security program. Major 
activities include: strategic planning and organizational development; budget development and oversight; contract 
management; project portfolio management, and development and implementation of technology policies and 
procedures. 
COMMUNITY BROADBAND 
The Community Broadband Division is responsible for 
overall strategy, program development, operations, 
and management of Santa Monica CityNet- the City’s 
100 Gigabit advanced broadband initiative. CityNet 
provides business broadband services to the City’s 
businesses and several affordable housing units. 
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION AND DEVELOPMENT 
The Digital Transformation and Development Division leads the City’s efforts in software engineering, information 
architecture, data analysis and integration, and geospatial analysis. The Division contributes to the City of 
Santa Monica’s mission of government transparency and resident empowerment by developing and supporting 
applications such as the Santamonica.gov,  the Santa Monica Mobile App, and the City’s open data program.  
INFRASTRUCTURE AND CLOUD SERVICES 
The infrastructure and Cloud Services Division manages the planning, implementation, and operation of the 
City’s information Technology infrastructure, including the City’s on premise and cloud-hosted datacenters, 
telecommunications services, and the City’s network that connects 44 City facilities, 13 School District facilities, 6 
College facilities, 156 traffic signals, and 14 parking facilities. The division also delivers a proactive, comprehensive 
customer support program to enable quality technology experiences for City staff and patrons.That includes a call-
center, department based business application services, and end-user device support.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - iNFORMATiON SERviCES


===== PAGE 211 =====

198
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - LiBRARY
LIBRARY
The mission of the Library is to provide 
resources, services, and a physical and 
virtual space to encourage the community 
to read, connect, relax, and learn. The 
Library supports literacy, lifelong learning, 
civic engagement, and cultural awareness 
through the Strategic Plan’s four main 
focus areas: 1) vibrant Learning Center, 
2) Wellbeing Cultivator, 3) Dynamic Third 
Place, and 4) Community and Cultural 
Connector.  The Library is committed 
to diversity, equity and inclusion and 
welcomes all. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
LIB
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 7,801,827$         8,954,988$         9,476,053$         9,468,229$         9,694,458$         
Supplies and Expenses 2,223,040           2,276,707           2,209,645           2,262,584           2,307,486           
Subtotal 10,024,867         11,231,695         11,685,698         11,730,813         12,001,944         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 56,659                39,646                66,118                57,000                -                          
Subtotal 56,659                39,646                66,118                57,000                -                          
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 7,801,827           8,954,988           9,476,053           9,468,229           9,694,458           
Supplies and Expenses 2,279,699           2,316,353           2,275,763           2,319,584           2,307,486           
Total Department 10,081,526$       11,271,341$       11,751,816$       11,787,813$       12,001,944$       
LIB
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 53.5 57.5 58.5 58.5 58.5
Temporary Staffing 14.5 16.4 15.8 15.8 15.8
 Total Personnel & Staffing 68.0 73.9 74.3 74.3 74.3


===== PAGE 212 =====

199
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION AND BUSINESS 
SERVICES 
The Administration and Business Services Division 
plans and oversees the operation of the department; 
coordinates system-wide business services, including 
HR processes, staff development, and facilities 
management; develops and disperses the budget; 
oversees branch facilities and daily operations; 
handles special projects; directs internal staff 
communications and engagement; and aligns staff 
work with the City’s and Library’s priorities, mission 
and vision. The division manages system-wide 
publicity and community relations, staffs the Library 
Board, assists the Friends of the Santa Monica Public 
Library, and maintains the safety and security of all 
Library facilities.  
COLLECTIONS, TECHNOLOGY AND PATRON SERVICES 
The Collections, Technology and Patron Services Division supports the 
Library’s strategic goal as a vibrant Learning Center by coordinating and 
maintaining collections to help community members learn, improve, and 
grow. The division includes the following functions: materials selection 
and acquisitions, cataloging and processing, and Patron Services desk 
and cardholder account management.  The division is also responsible 
for implementation of the Library’s technology initiatives, virtual 
infrastructure and digital environment, and supports the Library as a 
virtual Dynamic Third Place. 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND PROGRAMMING  
The Community Engagement and Programming Division addresses the programming needs of youth, families, and 
adults through innovative programs, activities, and learning experiences. in alignment with the Library’s goal as a 
vibrant Learning Center, this division produces a variety of literary programs and literacy services for adults and 
families, coordinates volunteers, and hosts technology and educational classes. The division supports the Library 
as a Wellbeing Cultivator and Community and Cultural Connector by collaborating with community groups and 
organizations, working with diverse populations, enhancing relationships with the schools and other youth service 
providers, and actively engaging with new partners and external resources to support services for all ages. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - LiBRARY


===== PAGE 213 =====

200
BRANCH AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES   
The Branch and Neighborhood Services Division plays 
a crucial role in extending the Library's mission into 
the heart of the community. This division manages 
the four branch libraries—Montana Branch, Ocean 
Park Branch, Fairview Branch, and Pico Branch—
ensuring that library services are accessible and 
tailored to meet the unique needs of Santa Monica's 
diverse neighborhoods. The branches anchored in 
the neighborhoods bring resources, programs, and 
services closer to residents. Each distinct branch works 
in collaboration with City and community partners to 
serve as local hubs for reading, learning, and engagement. Branch libraries act as literacy centers through adult 
tutoring and children's story time programming. They reflect community values and history, while promoting 
cultural diversity. By maintaining a strong presence in Santa Monica's neighborhoods, the Division enhances civic 
engagement and each neighborhood’s sense of safety through open and well-maintained branch libraries. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - LiBRARY


===== PAGE 214 =====

201
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - POLiCE
POLICE
We are dedicated to safeguarding our 
community by improving quality of life 
and upholding public trust. We endeavor 
to be law enforcement’s benchmark for 
excellence as we seek to eliminate crime 
and social disorder in collaboration with our 
community partners. 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
PD
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 101,267,253$     105,236,727$     109,698,462$     118,216,137$     120,571,775$     
Supplies and Expenses 9,040,503           10,685,004         10,697,336         12,019,537         12,427,102         
Subtotal 110,307,756       115,921,731       120,395,798       130,235,674       132,998,877       
Asset Seizure Fund
Supplies and Expenses 125,620              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 125,620              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Citizen's Option for Public Safety (COPS) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 135,159              87,685                109,094              196,276              200,202              
Subtotal 135,159              87,685                109,094              196,276              200,202              
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Salaries and Wages 231,632              287,705              284,754              -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses 805,970              620,124              339,496              -                          -                          
Subtotal 1,037,602           907,829              624,250              -                          -                          
Pier Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,915,026           1,940,057           1,742,890           1,796,273           1,836,964           
Supplies and Expenses 273,850              275,991              211,707              276,988              283,527              
Subtotal 2,188,876           2,216,048           1,954,597           2,073,261           2,120,491           
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 27,175                53,010                4,568                  4,659                  4,752                  
Subtotal 27,175                53,010                4,568                  4,659                  4,752                  
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 103,413,911       107,464,489       111,726,106       120,012,410       122,408,739       
Supplies and Expenses 10,408,277         11,721,814         11,362,201         12,497,460         12,915,583         
Total Department 113,822,188$     119,186,303$     123,088,307$     132,509,870$     135,324,322$     


===== PAGE 215 =====

202
SERVICE BY DIVISION
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE 
The Office of the Chief of Police is the Chief Executive of the Police Department and provides direct oversight of 
the executive staff. The Chief’s Office has the responsibility to ensure the implementation of goals, objectives, 
policies, procedures, and standards for the department. it establishes the overall mission and sets direction for 
the Department as a whole. The Chief’s Office takes part in the design, management, and evaluation of all law 
enforcement activities. The Chief’s Office also partakes in the strategic planning covering the use of resources, 
coordinating activities, and ensuring high quality service. Additionally, the office contributes to the development 
and implementation of projects and programs to maximize police services in coordination with the City Manager, 
the City Council, other city departments, and public and private organizations.  The Community Affairs Unit consists 
of the Crime Prevention Coordinators and Neighborhood Resource Officers, which works as a liaison between the 
public and the Police Department to resolve quality of life issues. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - POLiCE
PD
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 387.5 394.5 399.0 399.0 399.0
Temporary Staffing 21.0 22.5 22.5 22.5 20.0
 Total Personnel & Staffing 408.5 417.0 421.5 421.5 419.0


===== PAGE 216 =====

203
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - POLiCE
PATROL SERVICES 
The Patrol Operations Division (POD) encompasses 
several specialized units: Patrol, Downtown 
Services Unit (DSU), Direct Action Response Team 
(DART), Crime impact Team (CiT), Community 
Service Officers (CSO), K9 Program, and the Pier 
and Harbor Services Unit.  Patrol maintains a 
24/7 presence in the city, tasked with preserving 
peace, protecting life and property, enforcing 
laws, conducting preliminary investigations, and 
apprehending offenders. Patrol officers respond 
to a wide range of incidents, including 911 calls, 
thefts, assaults, disturbances, public health crises, 
and issues related to homelessness, open-air 
drug use, and drug dealing.  DSU uses bicycles 
to engage directly with the downtown community, emphasizing collaborative community policing in partnership 
with local businesses and the Business improvement District (BiDS).  DART works closely with Code Enforcement, 
Fire, and the City Attorney’s office to address criminal activity impacting the Santa Monica Beach and Pier area. 
This team focuses on providing effective solutions to issues affecting public safety and quality of life in the area.  
CiT targets crime suppression and prevention. Operating in high-crime areas, CiT collaborates with Neighborhood 
Resource Officers and local community members to identify and solve problems, as well as develop strategies to 
reduce criminal activity citywide.  CSOs handle a range of preliminary investigations, including traffic accidents and 
crimes, providing essential support to other divisions within the department. The K9 Unit works with trained police 
dogs to assist in a variety of operations. These units enhance the capabilities of officers by providing skills and 
senses that humans do not possess, particularly in areas such as detection, tracking, and apprehension.   
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS 
The Criminal investigations Division includes the Detective Bureau, Forensics Section, Records Section, and the 
Custody Section. The Detective Bureau is an impartial fact-finding entity responsible for the apprehension of 
criminals through investigation, recovery of property, and the preparation and presentation of evidence to the 
judicial system. Detectives also identify, register, and track previously convicted sex offenders and arson registrants 
utilizing State mandated protocols. The Forensics Section is a science based unit who forensically processes crime 
scenes and evidence.  The Records Section (and Provide Evidence Unit) is responsible for the management of public 
law enforcement records, Public Records Act requests for information, Uniform Crime Reporting, and the retention 
and safeguarding of evidence and found property.  The Custody Section’s primary mission is to take custody of 
people who have been arrested and ensure their safety and security until their arraignment or release.  
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 
The Special Operations Division is comprised of three sections: Special Enforcement Section, Strategic Planning 
Section, and Traffic Services Section.  Within the Special Enforcement Section lies the Homeless Liaison Program 


===== PAGE 217 =====

204
(HLP), Public Services Officers (PSOs) Unit, and collateral units including SWAT, Crisis Negotiations Unit, and the 
Mounted Unit.  HLP addresses quality of life issues associated with the homeless population while providing 
long-term solutions. This unit works hand in hand with other city departments, such as the Human Services 
Division and the City Attorney’s Office, to positively deal with the problems brought about by homelessness.  The 
PSOs are professional staff deployed in the parks, the airport, and downtown areas to address quality of life 
concerns.  Within the Strategic Planning Section lies the Traffic Enforcement Unit and Planning and intelligence, 
along with collateral units including Mobile Field Force, Major Accident Response Team, and the Mobile Command 
Post.  The Traffic Enforcement Unit, comprised of our motor officers and collision investigators, provides citywide 
enforcement, education, and investigation of vehicle code violations.  Planning and intelligence is responsible for 
facilitating 1st Amendment activities and intelligence coordination with local, state, and federal law enforcement 
partners.  Within the Traffic Services Section lies the Traffic Services Unit, Crossing Guard Unit, and Parking Citation 
Review.  The Traffic Services Unit and Crossing Guards provide intersection traffic control and parking enforcement 
services throughout the City and enhances pedestrian safety. 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES  
The Professional Services Division includes the Technical Services Section, Animal Control Section,  Budget & 
Procurement Unit, and Personnel and Training Unit (P&T). The Technical Services Section encompasses several 
units: The Logistics Unit is responsible for implementing and recommending technology integration into the 
police department and maintaining the police safety facility; The Range Unit provides firearms training and 
operation of the shooting range and equipment inventory and tracking; The DAF unit is the department’s Drone 
as a First Responder providing Remote Arial Systems (RAS) to assist in the daily operations of patrol.  The Animal 
Control Section operates a progressive animal care shelter and is responsible for the enforcement of both local 
and State animal control laws and regulations. The Budget and Procurement Unit is responsible for the fiscal 
planning, analysis, and procuring of department equipment and supplies. P&T oversees the recruitment, hiring, and 
processing of all new department employees.  P&T is also responsible for all on-going training for all department 
personnel. 
HARBOR UNIT 
The Pier and Harbor Services Unit provides round-the-clock 
security, rescue, and first aid services to individuals utilizing 
the Pier, beach, and ocean areas. in addition to responding 
to emergencies, the unit offers continuous public 
information on weather, tides, boating, fishing, and other 
marine-related matters. Working closely with municipal, 
county, and state agencies, the unit helps monitor for 
criminal activity on the Pier and surrounding beach, 
reporting suspicious incidents to law enforcement. The unit 
also assists in maintaining and protecting the infrastructure 
of the Municipal Pier, including pilings, moorings, and 
related equipment.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - POLiCE


===== PAGE 218 =====

205
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - PUBLiC WORKS
PUBLIC WORKS
The mission of the Public Works 
Department is to protect and enrich the 
quality of life in the City through the 
sustainable maintenance, management, 
and enhancement of resources and public 
infrastructure.
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
PW
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 30,023,581$       30,694,517$       34,933,521$       34,903,734$       35,831,748$       
Supplies and Expenses 18,714,511         20,565,773         21,807,129         25,387,017         26,205,792         
Subtotal 48,738,092         51,260,290         56,740,650         60,290,751         62,037,540         
Airport Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,994,103           2,171,953           2,647,817           2,921,182           3,008,250           
Supplies and Expenses 6,649,615           10,333,713         8,606,503           8,925,971           9,284,675           
Subtotal 8,643,718           12,505,666         11,254,320         11,847,153         12,292,925         
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,724,422           3,836,803           4,179,517           4,192,179           4,313,227           
Supplies and Expenses 2,794,477           3,268,556           3,158,291           3,306,021           3,421,456           
Subtotal 6,518,899           7,105,359           7,337,808           7,498,200           7,734,683           
Cemetery Fund
Salaries and Wages 754,716              873,825              1,041,726           1,067,521           1,082,911           
Supplies and Expenses 1,508,853           1,460,011           1,809,418           1,823,095           1,894,320           
Subtotal 2,263,569           2,333,836           2,851,144           2,890,616           2,977,231           
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 547,427              536,198              816,097              1,020,965           1,043,005           
Subtotal 547,427              536,198              816,097              1,020,965           1,043,005           
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 99,293                174,012              245,580              -                          -                          
Subtotal 99,293                174,012              245,580              -                          -                          
Pier Fund
Salaries and Wages 555,526              514,763              629,592              580,649              598,333              
Supplies and Expenses 2,320,994           2,384,281           2,534,999           2,485,559           2,547,431           
Subtotal 2,876,520           2,899,044           3,164,591           3,066,208           3,145,764           
Resource Recovery & Recycling Fund
Salaries and Wages 11,287,256         12,840,484         14,552,955         15,284,479         15,727,958         
Supplies and Expenses 15,527,744         16,546,474         21,457,063         23,457,384         24,206,170         
Subtotal 26,815,000         29,386,958         36,010,018         38,741,863         39,934,128         
Vehicle Management Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,224,905           3,397,709           4,106,205           4,159,010           4,255,351           
Supplies and Expenses 5,044,818           5,378,118           5,651,527           5,541,204           5,722,391           
Subtotal 8,269,723           8,775,827           9,757,732           9,700,214           9,977,742           
Wastewater Fund
Salaries and Wages 2,628,755           2,819,678           3,612,719           3,909,560           4,043,108           
Supplies and Expenses 9,858,649           12,766,881         17,550,370         18,277,394         18,687,245         
Subtotal 12,487,404         15,586,559         21,163,089         22,186,954         22,730,353         
Water Fund
Salaries and Wages 8,266,877           8,162,186           10,180,378         10,615,757         10,968,319         
Supplies and Expenses 23,395,080         25,181,871         20,710,574         21,685,231         22,416,591         
Subtotal 31,661,957         33,344,057         30,890,952         32,300,988         33,384,910         
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 62,460,141         65,311,918         75,884,430         77,634,071         79,829,205         
Supplies and Expenses 86,461,461         98,595,888         104,347,551       111,909,841       115,429,076       
Total Department 148,921,602$     163,907,806$     180,231,981$     189,543,912$     195,258,281$     


===== PAGE 219 =====

206
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
The Administrative Services Division directs the work of the 
Department and provides administrative support to the Public 
Works Divisions. Support includes coordinating and preparing the 
department operating budget, coordinating and managing the 
City’s Capital improvement Program and budget, coordinating City 
Council staff reports and information items, monitoring responses 
to constituent inquiries, and conducting research and analysis. The 
division is also responsible for inter-departmental and interagency 
coordination. Within the division, Woodlawn Cemetery, Mausoleum 
and Mortuary provides mortuary services, funeral service planning, 
and cemetery services including sale of traditional and green 
burial plots. in addition, the Fleet Management section procures 
and services the City’s fleet including approximately 800 pieces of 
equipment, vehicles and maintenance of various fueling stations.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - PUBLiC WORKS
PW
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 30,023,581$       30,694,517$       34,933,521$       34,903,734$       35,831,748$       
Supplies and Expenses 18,714,511         20,565,773         21,807,129         25,387,017         26,205,792         
Subtotal 48,738,092         51,260,290         56,740,650         60,290,751         62,037,540         
Airport Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,994,103           2,171,953           2,647,817           2,921,182           3,008,250           
Supplies and Expenses 6,649,615           10,333,713         8,606,503           8,925,971           9,284,675           
Subtotal 8,643,718           12,505,666         11,254,320         11,847,153         12,292,925         
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,724,422           3,836,803           4,179,517           4,192,179           4,313,227           
Supplies and Expenses 2,794,477           3,268,556           3,158,291           3,306,021           3,421,456           
Subtotal 6,518,899           7,105,359           7,337,808           7,498,200           7,734,683           
Cemetery Fund
Salaries and Wages 754,716              873,825              1,041,726           1,067,521           1,082,911           
Supplies and Expenses 1,508,853           1,460,011           1,809,418           1,823,095           1,894,320           
Subtotal 2,263,569           2,333,836           2,851,144           2,890,616           2,977,231           
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 547,427              536,198              816,097              1,020,965           1,043,005           
Subtotal 547,427              536,198              816,097              1,020,965           1,043,005           
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 99,293                174,012              245,580              -                          -                          
Subtotal 99,293                174,012              245,580              -                          -                          
Pier Fund
Salaries and Wages 555,526              514,763              629,592              580,649              598,333              
Supplies and Expenses 2,320,994           2,384,281           2,534,999           2,485,559           2,547,431           
Subtotal 2,876,520           2,899,044           3,164,591           3,066,208           3,145,764           
Resource Recovery & Recycling Fund
Salaries and Wages 11,287,256         12,840,484         14,552,955         15,284,479         15,727,958         
Supplies and Expenses 15,527,744         16,546,474         21,457,063         23,457,384         24,206,170         
Subtotal 26,815,000         29,386,958         36,010,018         38,741,863         39,934,128         
Vehicle Management Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,224,905           3,397,709           4,106,205           4,159,010           4,255,351           
Supplies and Expenses 5,044,818           5,378,118           5,651,527           5,541,204           5,722,391           
Subtotal 8,269,723           8,775,827           9,757,732           9,700,214           9,977,742           
Wastewater Fund
Salaries and Wages 2,628,755           2,819,678           3,612,719           3,909,560           4,043,108           
Supplies and Expenses 9,858,649           12,766,881         17,550,370         18,277,394         18,687,245         
Subtotal 12,487,404         15,586,559         21,163,089         22,186,954         22,730,353         
Water Fund
Salaries and Wages 8,266,877           8,162,186           10,180,378         10,615,757         10,968,319         
Supplies and Expenses 23,395,080         25,181,871         20,710,574         21,685,231         22,416,591         
Subtotal 31,661,957         33,344,057         30,890,952         32,300,988         33,384,910         
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 62,460,141         65,311,918         75,884,430         77,634,071         79,829,205         
Supplies and Expenses 86,461,461         98,595,888         104,347,551       111,909,841       115,429,076       
Total Department 148,921,602$     163,907,806$     180,231,981$     189,543,912$     195,258,281$     
PW
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 30,023,581$       30,694,517$       34,933,521$       34,903,734$       35,831,748$       
Supplies and Expenses 18,714,511         20,565,773         21,807,129         25,387,017         26,205,792         
Subtotal 48,738,092         51,260,290         56,740,650         60,290,751         62,037,540         
Airport Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,994,103           2,171,953           2,647,817           2,921,182           3,008,250           
Supplies and Expenses 6,649,615           10,333,713         8,606,503           8,925,971           9,284,675           
Subtotal 8,643,718           12,505,666         11,254,320         11,847,153         12,292,925         
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,724,422           3,836,803           4,179,517           4,192,179           4,313,227           
Supplies and Expenses 2,794,477           3,268,556           3,158,291           3,306,021           3,421,456           
Subtotal 6,518,899           7,105,359           7,337,808           7,498,200           7,734,683           
Cemetery Fund
Salaries and Wages 754,716              873,825              1,041,726           1,067,521           1,082,911           
Supplies and Expenses 1,508,853           1,460,011           1,809,418           1,823,095           1,894,320           
Subtotal 2,263,569           2,333,836           2,851,144           2,890,616           2,977,231           
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 547,427              536,198              816,097              1,020,965           1,043,005           
Subtotal 547,427              536,198              816,097              1,020,965           1,043,005           
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 99,293                174,012              245,580              -                          -                          
Subtotal 99,293                174,012              245,580              -                          -                          
Pier Fund
Salaries and Wages 555,526              514,763              629,592              580,649              598,333              
Supplies and Expenses 2,320,994           2,384,281           2,534,999           2,485,559           2,547,431           
Subtotal 2,876,520           2,899,044           3,164,591           3,066,208           3,145,764           
Resource Recovery & Recycling Fund
Salaries and Wages 11,287,256         12,840,484         14,552,955         15,284,479         15,727,958         
Supplies and Expenses 15,527,744         16,546,474         21,457,063         23,457,384         24,206,170         
Subtotal 26,815,000         29,386,958         36,010,018         38,741,863         39,934,128         
Vehicle Management Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,224,905           3,397,709           4,106,205           4,159,010           4,255,351           
Supplies and Expenses 5,044,818           5,378,118           5,651,527           5,541,204           5,722,391           
Subtotal 8,269,723           8,775,827           9,757,732           9,700,214           9,977,742           
Wastewater Fund
Salaries and Wages 2,628,755           2,819,678           3,612,719           3,909,560           4,043,108           
Supplies and Expenses 9,858,649           12,766,881         17,550,370         18,277,394         18,687,245         
Subtotal 12,487,404         15,586,559         21,163,089         22,186,954         22,730,353         
Water Fund
Salaries and Wages 8,266,877           8,162,186           10,180,378         10,615,757         10,968,319         
Supplies and Expenses 23,395,080         25,181,871         20,710,574         21,685,231         22,416,591         
Subtotal 31,661,957         33,344,057         30,890,952         32,300,988         33,384,910         
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 62,460,141         65,311,918         75,884,430         77,634,071         79,829,205         
Supplies and Expenses 86,461,461         98,595,888         104,347,551       111,909,841       115,429,076       
Total Department 148,921,602$     163,907,806$     180,231,981$     189,543,912$     195,258,281$     
PW
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 459.5 484.5 490.0 493.0 493.0
Temporary Staffing 2.9 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
 Total Personnel & Staffing 462.4 484.9 490.4 493.4 493.4


===== PAGE 220 =====

207
AIRPORT 
The Airport Division manages the operation of the Santa Monica Municipal Airport, a general aviation airport. 
Airport Division provides enforcement of noise regulations and applicable fees and user rates, and acts as a liaison 
with the neighboring community, aviation groups, and the Airport Commission. The Airport Division provides 
property management services to the numerous tenants of the Airport campus, and provides for the general 
maintenance and Capital improvements of City-owned Airport property and buildings.
ARCHITECTURE SERVICES 
The Architecture Services Division is responsible for the 
planning, design, construction and management of capital 
improvement projects related to City-owned and leased 
facilities, including public buildings, community and 
recreation centers, parks, parking structures, transportation 
facilities, libraries and fire stations. The Division incorporates 
the City’s sustainable design directives, while maintaining 
a high standard of economy, utility, and aesthetics. The 
division strives to provide innovative design solutions in the 
development and construction of efficient, sustainable, safe, 
and inspiring public facilities and open spaces.
ENGINEERING AND STREET SERVICES  
The Engineering and Street Services Division provides sustainable design, construction, and construction 
management services for City public infrastructure improvements including annual street resurfacing, water/
waste water main replacement, pier upgrades, airport improvements, urban runoff mitigation and watershed 
management. Additionally, the Division provides various services related to land development including permit 
review, right-of-way inspection, and utility coordination. Within the division, the Street Services section repairs and 
maintains city streets, alleys, and sidewalks as well as graffiti removal throughout the City. 
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE 
The Facilities Maintenance Division ensures the city's infrastructure is clean, safe, and well-maintained through 
four specialized sections/teams. The Custodial Services section keeps public parks, restrooms, and city facilities 
clean through in-house staff and contractors. The Promenade Maintenance section oversees over 4 million square 
feet of downtown area, maintaining streets, sidewalks, and plazas for aesthetics and functionality. The Homeless 
Support Team (HoST) section collaborates with SMPD and SMFD to address homelessness-related waste and 
encampment clean ups. The Facilities Services section manages the upkeep of city buildings, including HvAC, 
electrical, plumbing, and fire safety. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - PUBLiC WORKS


===== PAGE 221 =====

208
OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
The Office of Sustainability and the Environment is responsible for strategic initiatives that integrate 
environmental, economic, and social sustainability. The Office oversees programs and policies related to climate 
action and adaptation, resource management, sustainable procurement, toxic use reduction and community 
resiliency. The Office manages the community garden program, leads the citywide efforts to enhance and expand 
electric vehicle infrastructure, and maintains efforts to achieve water self-sufficiency, zero waste, and carbon 
neutrality. it also provides education and outreach to residents, students, and businesses regarding sustainable 
practices and encourages citywide efforts to realize outcomes in the Sustainable City Plan.
PUBLIC LANDSCAPE 
The Public Landscape Division maintains and enhances the City’s parks, landscapes, urban forest, Santa Monica 
State Beach, Santa Monica Pier, Santa Monica Swim Center, and Annenberg Community Beach House. These assets 
require constant upkeep and repairs as they are heavily used for recreation, leisure, commerce, and events, and 
impact health, wellness, and quality of life. Some responsibilities include tennis and basketball courts, athletic 
fields, park amenities, Muscle Beach, managing over 35,000 public trees, ongoing replacement of pier deck boards; 
and keeping the waterfront clean and safe. The Division leads or collaborates with other departments on a variety 
of capital improvement projects and implements the vision of the City’s Urban Forest Master Plan.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - PUBLiC WORKS


===== PAGE 222 =====

209
RESOURCE RECOVERY AND RECYCLING (RRR) 
The Resource Recovery and Recycling team, also known as RRR, collects recyclables and solid waste throughout 
Santa Monica and conducts digital, print, and in-person outreach to help the community practice a zero waste 
lifestyle of reduce, reuse, and recycle. in addition to providing seven-day per week organics, recyclables, and landfill 
trash collection to all residences and businesses, RRR’s diverse staff of essential workers delivers bulky item and 
illegal dumping collection, street sweeping, and trash enclosure plan checks. RRR also spearheads the city’s zero 
waste efforts, which include drafting and executing the Council adopted Zero Waste Plan, implementing state 
and local laws to enhance the recycling of food scraps and other materials, and administering programs such as 
door-to-door household hazardous waste collection, edible food recovery, construction and demolition material 
recycling, and community events that collect electronic waste and give away free compost.
WATER RESOURCES 
The Water Resources Division provides a safe, reliable and sustainable water supply for residents and businesses, 
operates the City’s potable and recycled water production and treatment facilities and distribution systems, 
manages water pollution prevention programs, oversees groundwater basin clean-up operations, and maintains 
the wastewater collection and conveyance system. The Division is working towards reducing the City’s reliance 
on imported water supplies by diversifying the City's water supply portfolio to enhance sustainability and drought 
resiliency through projects like the recently completed Sustainable Water infrastructure Project (SWiP) and enhance 
production efficiency of the City's Arcadia Water Treatment Plant by the end of 2025. The SWiP recovers 1,680 
acre-feet of water annually (approximately 11% of the City’s supply) from stormwater, dry weather urban runoff 
and municipal wastewater through a new stormwater harvesting tank, a new advanced water treatment facility, 
and upgrades to the Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility (SMURRF). Production efficiency enhancement 
of the City's Arcadia Water Treatment Plant will increase overall recovery to 90%, adding an additional 1,200 acre-
feet of water annually (approximately 8% of the City's water supply). 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - PUBLiC WORKS


===== PAGE 223 =====

210
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - RECREATiON AND ARTS 
RECREATION AND ARTS
The Recreation & Arts Department enriches 
lives, advances equity, and empowers 
people to thrive by providing a dynamic 
array of programs and services - arts, 
culture, recreation & enrichment - created 
with and for the community in public 
facilities and natural spaces dedicated 
for play, congregation and communal 
experience. 
initiatives of the new department include 
the future management and programming 
at the Miles Memorial Playhouse and 
Camera Obscura arts and cultural facilities, 
managing the City’s Public Art Program, 
citywide art installations and reframing 
historic artworks including the City Hall 
murals; promoting economic recovery 
through art activations and events; 
activating Santa Monica’s beachfront 
and the Annenberg Community Beach 
House as a tourist destinations and a key 
element of Santa Monica’s beachfront 
brand; addressing the conflicts between 
demand for recreational amenities and 
capacity, managing recreational spaces 
and programs, and permitting citywide 
community events in indoor and outdoor 
spaces. 


===== PAGE 224 =====

211
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
SERVICE BY DIVISION
ADMINISTRATION   
The Administration Division guides the Department’s activities to ensure access to the arts, cultural, recreational, 
social and leisure programs and services that meet the needs and interests of the community. Additionally, the 
Division leads development of the Department’s budget and financial reporting, coordinates its communication 
and marketing outreach, leads all administrative processes, oversees the use and development of the Department’s 
software solutions, and issues citywide event permits. 
COMMUNITY RECREATION 
The Community Recreation Division manages recreation and active-living programs at the City’s parks, beach, 
and recreation facilities. in addition, the Division offers aquatics programming at the City’s award-winning Santa 
Monica Swim Center, Santa Monica High School Aquatics Center and Annenberg Community Beach House, 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - RECREATiON AND ARTSRAD
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 6,689,434$         6,174,039$         7,491,841$         7,647,425$         7,859,711$         
Supplies and Expenses 3,243,212           2,686,889           3,218,877           3,348,283           3,361,667           
Subtotal 9,932,646           8,860,928           10,710,718         10,995,708         11,221,378         
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,349,803           1,335,296           1,722,794           1,863,518           1,901,037           
Supplies and Expenses 1,304,305           1,572,688           1,443,571           11,574,603         11,927,664         
Subtotal 2,654,108           2,907,984           3,166,365           13,438,121         13,828,701         
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Salaries and Wages 9,854                  4,908                  -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses (550)                    -                          -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 9,304                  4,908                  -                          -                          -                          
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,083,784           342,684              350,915              357,933              365,092              
Subtotal 1,083,784           342,684              350,915              357,933              365,092              
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 8,049,091           7,514,243           9,214,635           9,510,943           9,760,748           
Supplies and Expenses 5,630,751           4,602,261           5,013,363           15,280,819         15,654,423         
Total Department 13,679,842$       12,116,504$       14,227,998$       24,791,762$       25,415,171$       
RAD
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 0.0 46.1 48.1 49.6 49.6
Temporary Staffing 0.0 35.3 34.1 34.3 34.3
 Total Personnel & Staffing 0.0 81.4 82.2 83.8 83.8


===== PAGE 225 =====

212
including recreational and lap swimming, swim instruction, specialty classes, and competitive swimming opportunities. 
The Division oversees adult sports leagues, the Memorial Park Gym, the Cove Skatepark, the Community Classes and 
Camps Program, Westside Special Olympics, and beach recreation activities. The Division also issues permits for the use 
of facilities, Santa Monica beach activities, BBQ picnic areas, sports fields, tennis courts, pickleball, commercial fitness 
and athletic instruction. 
CULTURAL AFFAIRS  
The Cultural Affairs Division manages the development and implementation of a broad range of community-focused 
arts and cultural programs, services and assets. This includes supporting local artists and arts organizations through 
direct grants, residency programs, visibility, and convenings; commissioning public art; implementing creative 
partnerships to reopen cultural facilities such as the Miles Playhouse and Camera Obscura; and overseeing the 
Annenberg Community Beach House. Alongside the Arts Commission, the Division serves as an advocate for arts 
and culture. Cultural Affairs also runs Art of Recovery, a pioneering program that uses dynamic partnerships between 
creatives and other sectors to achieve the City’s recovery goals. The Division’s newest initiative, Acknowledge and 
Reframe Together (Reframe), produces public art and civic memory projects that center community voices with the aim 
of creating a more just and equitable Santa Monica.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - RECREATiON AND ARTS 


===== PAGE 226 =====

213
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATiON 
DEPARTMENT OF 
TRANSPORTATION 
The Santa Monica Department of 
Transportation (DOT) provides safe and 
accessible connections to opportunity for 
residents, visitors and local employees 
within the City of Santa Monica and the 
broader Big Blue Bus service area. The 
department also leads the implementation 
of the City’s vision for a future less reliant 
on automobiles to improve the safety of our 
streets, enhance community wellbeing, and 
reduce both congestion and greenhouse gas 
emissions. DOT combines Big Blue Bus (BBB) 
planning, operations and maintenance; 
traffic engineering, operations and 
maintenance; multi-modal transportation 
planning, programming and design; shared 
use mobility regulation; transportation 
permitting and large employer trip reduction 
efforts; roadway safety messaging; and 
parking operations and management under 
one administration. DoT advances BBB’s 
regional transit service, Mobility On-Demand 
Every Day (MODE) paratransit program, 
and the planning and implementation 
of complete, green streets to include 
safe and appealing bus, bike, pedestrian, 
micromobility, and first-last mile options. 
DOT provides opportunities for community 
mobility and wellbeing as part of an active, 
accessible, congestion-relieving, multimodal 
transportation network.


===== PAGE 227 =====

214
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATiON 
DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
DOT
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 5,822,557$         6,209,357$         6,815,335$         7,023,027$         7,248,528$         
Supplies and Expenses 16,595,383         17,181,122         19,438,461         20,237,316         20,588,138         
Subtotal 22,417,940         23,390,479         26,253,796         27,260,343         27,836,666         
Big Blue Bus Fund
Salaries and Wages 55,518,045         55,998,600         65,499,250         68,044,611         69,700,850         
Supplies and Expenses 21,395,085         21,308,697         26,291,293         28,992,184         30,541,745         
Subtotal 76,913,130         77,307,297         91,790,543         97,036,795         100,242,595       
Local Return Fund
Supplies and Expenses 357,175              136,406              352,563              204,600              204,600              
Subtotal 357,175              136,406              352,563              204,600              204,600              
Parking Authority Fund
Salaries and Wages 950                     350                     900                     900                     900                     
Subtotal 950                     350                     900                     900                     900                     
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 278,025              277,738              337,644              344,397              351,285              
Subtotal 278,025              277,738              337,644              344,397              351,285              
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 61,341,552         62,208,307         72,315,485         75,068,538         76,950,278         
Supplies and Expenses 38,625,668         38,903,963         46,419,961         49,778,497         51,685,768         
Total Department 99,967,220$       101,112,270$     118,735,446$     124,847,035$     128,636,046$     
DOT
PERSONNEL
2022-23 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2023-24 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Permanent Employees 469.3 473.3 477.3 480.0 480.0
Temporary Staffing 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
 Total Personnel & Staffing 469.7 473.7 477.7 480.5 480.5


===== PAGE 228 =====

215
SERVICE BY DIVISION
FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES  
The Finance and Administrative Services Division provides leadership and strategic direction to DoT, ensuring stable 
regional, federal, and state funding to support the Department’s operations and capital projects. 
The Finance and Administrative Services Division oversees the development and management of the department’s 
operating and capital budgets, multi-year forecasts, grants administration, accounts payable and recievable, 
timekeeping, procurement, financial reporting, and audits. Additionally, the division ensures compliance with all 
federal, state, and local funding requirements. The division also manages the department’s recruitment, hiring of 
staff, and employee relations.  
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE 
The Community Engagement and Customer 
Experience Division is responsible for marketing 
and communications for Big Blue Bus (BBB), the 
Mobility On-Demand Every Day (MODE) program; 
community outreach and customer information. 
The division develops and administers annual 
customer surveys, manages media and public 
relations activities, works with local and regional 
transportation partners on communications, 
captures and responds to customer inquiries 
related to BBB and MODE service, facilitates transit 
fare product purchases and in-person assistance at 
Blue: The Transit Store, and maintains and operates 
both the BBB and MODE Call Centers. 
The Division manages the conceptualization, 
graphic design, copywriting, and production of all 
digital and printed public information for BBB and 
MODE, including the Little Blue Book transit guide, 
system maps, route maps, interior and exterior bus 
advertising, audio announcements, website, social 
media, email marketing, video production, internal 
and external publications, and all customer-facing 
aspects of BBB’s bus stops and transit hubs, and 
other activities in support of BBB’s goals and 
objectives.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATiON 


===== PAGE 229 =====

216
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATiON 
MAINTENANCE
The Maintenance Division is responsible for the 
procurement, maintenance, technology, and servicing 
of the Big Blue Bus (BBB) fleet of more than 195 clean 
fuel and zero-emission buses and service vehicles as 
well as providing maintenance services to both the Fire 
and Police Department heavy vehicles and apparatus. 
in addition, the Division is responsible for cleaning and 
fueling buses used in revenue service, procurement 
of goods and services, parts and equipment inventory 
management/control, and the capital projects 
and overall maintenance of all BBB infrastructure 
supporting these functions. The Division is also 
responsible for all BBB facilities infrastructure and the 
BBB bus stop maintenance and cleaning program, bus 
stop amenities, facility and heavy shop equipment 
preventative maintenance programs, and BBB capital 
improvement projects related to facility and bus stop 
enhancements.
MOBILITY 
The Mobility Division provides accessible connections to 
opportunity and strives to manage congestion, reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, and eliminate fatal and severe 
injury crashes from our streets. The team oversees citywide 
transportation to increase the safety, efficiency, quality, 
convenience, and variety of Santa Monica’s transportation 
options and ensure the safe movement of people and goods 
throughout the City. The division is responsible for a Capital 
improvement Project (CiP) program to implement the 
protected bike lane network envisioned in the Bike Action 
Plan Amendment, the Pedestrian Action Plan, and safety 
enhancements to realize our goal of eliminating all traffic 
fatalities by 2026 as part of the City’s vision Zero commitment. 
The Mobility Division coordinates city-wide efforts that affect 
how our streets are designed, operated, and maintained. The 
Division oversees the City’s traffic management system, traffic 
signals, traffic signs and markings, as well as programs including 
Shared Use Mobility, Personal Delivery Devices, Take the Friendly 
Road Safety Campaign, and the Large Employer Trip Reduction 
Ordinance.  


===== PAGE 230 =====

217
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATiON 
The Division reviews private property development for compliance with the City’s transportation design and 
transportation demand management requirements, and seeks to reduce construction disruption through mitigation 
plans and permitting for temporary traffic controls, oversize loads and roadway closures. The Division is responsible 
for the day-to-day operations of the Preferential Parking Program and Taxicab and Pedicab permitting and policy.  
OPERATIONS 
The Operations Division is responsible for the delivery of safe, reliable, and efficient daily service to our customers 
on all of Big Blue Bus’s (BBB’s) routes across its service area.  Operations is responsible for all BBB operations 
personnel including 335 Motor Coach Operators and Motor Coach Operator Supervisors who provide support to 
street operations, fleet communications, and daily staff scheduling. The Division also manages the Motor Coach 
Operator General Work Bid three times per year, facilitates service delivery for special events and related detours 
in the City and the Los Angeles service area, and oversees service disruptions in real-time due to unforeseen road 
events.
PARKING OPERATIONS
The Parking Operations Division is responsible for the revenues, 
management, and operations of the City’s 5,600 on-street parking 
meters and 41 off-street public parking facilities in Downtown, the 
beach lots and other locations citywide. Through innovative staffing 
and technology solutions, the Division ensures efficient access to 
each facility, protects parking assets and revenues, enhances the 
customer experience, provides safe and well-maintained parking 
facilities, and supports the City’s broader transportation and 
mobility goals through data analytics and regulatory compliance. 
Division staff oversee the collection and adjudication of parking 
citations, administer the City’s residential, recreational, and other 
parking permit programs, as well as manages the coordination 
of special event parking activations in the City’s off-street 
public parking facilities. The Division also maintains a working 
collaboration with regulatory bodies such as the California Coastal 
Commission to ensure timely compliance for beach zone access and 
parking issues.
TRANSIT PLANNING AND PERFORMANCE 
The Transit Planning and Performance Division is responsible for service planning for Big Blue Bus and MODE. This 
includes route and schedule changes, vehicle & operator scheduling, improving travel times, setting fare policies, 
installing bus stop amenities, and conducting transit studies and analyses. The Division collects and reports 
performance metrics (ridership, service hours and miles, route performance, costs, safety, maintenance, fares) for 
stakeholders and for federally required reporting purposes. The Division also coordinates with other LA County 
transit agencies to improve regional transit services. 


===== PAGE 231 =====

218
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATiON 
SAFETY AND TRAINING
The Safety and Training Division is responsible for the development, management, and implementation of all 
DoT safety, security, and training programs. The Division develops and maintains Big Blue Bus (BBB) Public 
Transportation Agency Safety Plan (PTASP), which ensures that the transit agency meets or exceeds its safety 
objectives through the collection, analysis, and assessment of safety data. it also identifies and analyzes hazards 
and takes action to mitigate safety risks. 


===== PAGE 232 =====

219
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - NON-DEPARTMENTAL
NON-DEPARTMENTAL
The Non-Departmental budget represents 
activities that are not attributed to any 
one specific department in the City. 
The Non-Departmental budget includes 
appropriations to manage the use of federal 
funding sources such as Coronavirus Aid, 
Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act 
and the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA); 
payments to pay down the California 
Public Employees’ Retirement System 
(CalPERS) unfunded liability; annual 
required contribution (ARC) to prefund 
Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) 
liabilities; payment to the Santa Monica-
Malibu Unified School District (SMMUSD) 
in return for the use of certain school 
district facilities; debt service payments; 
and transfers to/from other funds such as 
a transfer per the Advisory Measure GS to 
fund schools, homelessness prevention, and 
affordable housing. 
Non-Dept
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,019,063$         934,473$            5,904,688$         2,097,754$         1,607,955$         
Supplies and Expenses 126,806,305       55,640,470         54,026,006         55,710,592         55,767,055         
Subtotal 127,825,368       56,574,943         59,930,694         57,808,346         57,375,010         
Airport Fund
Salaries and Wages 7,631                  6,987                  863                     907                     953                     
Supplies and Expenses 402,456              629,728              776,461              770,406              789,866              
Subtotal 410,087              636,715              777,324              771,313              790,819              
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 24,614                23,981                29,578                31,057                32,610                
Supplies and Expenses 108,640              (2,689,033)          (2,483,664)          (3,327,195)          (4,435,281)          
Subtotal 133,254              (2,665,052)          (2,454,086)          (3,296,138)          (4,402,671)          
Big Blue Bus Fund
Salaries and Wages 377,503              395,110              309,469              324,942              341,189              
Supplies and Expenses (67,324)               449,795              (391,932)             (440,885)             (429,190)             
Subtotal 310,179              844,905              (82,463)               (115,943)             (88,001)               
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Subtotal 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Cemetery Fund
Salaries and Wages (6,060)                 1,055                  -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses (504,313)             (581,840)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Subtotal (510,373)             (580,785)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Subtotal 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Community Broadband Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,069                  -                          -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses 222,000              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 225,069              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Gas Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Subtotal 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Housing Authority Fund
Supplies and Expenses (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Subtotal (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Info Tech Rplcmnt & Serv Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Local Return Fund
Supplies and Expenses 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Subtotal 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Low/Moderate Income Housing Asset Fund
Supplies and Expenses 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              
Subtotal 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              


===== PAGE 233 =====

220
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - NON-DEPARTMENTAL 
Non-Dept
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,019,063$         934,473$            5,904,688$         2,097,754$         1,607,955$         
Supplies and Expenses 126,806,305       55,640,470         54,026,006         55,710,592         55,767,055         
Subtotal 127,825,368       56,574,943         59,930,694         57,808,346         57,375,010         
Airport Fund
Salaries and Wages 7,631                  6,987                  863                     907                     953                     
Supplies and Expenses 402,456              629,728              776,461              770,406              789,866              
Subtotal 410,087              636,715              777,324              771,313              790,819              
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 24,614                23,981                29,578                31,057                32,610                
Supplies and Expenses 108,640              (2,689,033)          (2,483,664)          (3,327,195)          (4,435,281)          
Subtotal 133,254              (2,665,052)          (2,454,086)          (3,296,138)          (4,402,671)          
Big Blue Bus Fund
Salaries and Wages 377,503              395,110              309,469              324,942              341,189              
Supplies and Expenses (67,324)               449,795              (391,932)             (440,885)             (429,190)             
Subtotal 310,179              844,905              (82,463)               (115,943)             (88,001)               
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Subtotal 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Cemetery Fund
Salaries and Wages (6,060)                 1,055                  -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses (504,313)             (581,840)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Subtotal (510,373)             (580,785)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Subtotal 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Community Broadband Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,069                  -                          -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses 222,000              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 225,069              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Gas Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Subtotal 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Housing Authority Fund
Supplies and Expenses (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Subtotal (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Info Tech Rplcmnt & Serv Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Local Return Fund
Supplies and Expenses 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Subtotal 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Low/Moderate Income Housing Asset Fund
Supplies and Expenses 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              
Subtotal 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              
Non-Dept
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,019,063$         934,473$            5,904,688$         2,097,754$         1,607,955$         
Supplies and Expenses 126,806,305       55,640,470         54,026,006         55,710,592         55,767,055         
Subtotal 127,825,368       56,574,943         59,930,694         57,808,346         57,375,010         
Airport Fund
Salaries and Wages 7,631                  6,987                  863                     907                     953                     
Supplies and Expenses 402,456              629,728              776,461              770,406              789,866              
Subtotal 410,087              636,715              777,324              771,313              790,819              
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 24,614                23,981                29,578                31,057                32,610                
Supplies and Expenses 108,640              (2,689,033)          (2,483,664)          (3,327,195)          (4,435,281)          
Subtotal 133,254              (2,665,052)          (2,454,086)          (3,296,138)          (4,402,671)          
Big Blue Bus Fund
Salaries and Wages 377,503              395,110              309,469              324,942              341,189              
Supplies and Expenses (67,324)               449,795              (391,932)             (440,885)             (429,190)             
Subtotal 310,179              844,905              (82,463)               (115,943)             (88,001)               
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Subtotal 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Cemetery Fund
Salaries and Wages (6,060)                 1,055                  -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses (504,313)             (581,840)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Subtotal (510,373)             (580,785)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Subtotal 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Community Broadband Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,069                  -                          -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses 222,000              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 225,069              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Gas Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Subtotal 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Housing Authority Fund
Supplies and Expenses (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Subtotal (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Info Tech Rplcmnt & Serv Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Local Return Fund
Supplies and Expenses 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Subtotal 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Low/Moderate Income Housing Asset Fund
Supplies and Expenses 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              
Subtotal 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              
Non-Dept
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Measure GS Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,190,000           18,810,000         17,057,122         490,219              519,780              
Subtotal 1,190,000           18,810,000         17,057,122         490,219              519,780              
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 912,126              974,278              398,418              420,218              316,889              
Subtotal 912,126              974,278              398,418              420,218              316,889              
Pier Fund
Salaries and Wages 11,351                11,653                9,917                  10,413                10,934                
Supplies and Expenses (2,999,508)          (724,809)             (3,570,382)          (462,143)             (1,809,536)          
Subtotal (2,988,157)          (713,156)             (3,560,465)          (451,730)             (1,798,602)          
Resource Recovery & Recycling Fund
Salaries and Wages 105,855              107,073              94,189                98,899                103,844              
Supplies and Expenses 1,083,309           1,298,770           1,220,015           1,297,532           1,309,797           
Subtotal 1,189,164           1,405,843           1,314,204           1,396,431           1,413,641           
SCAQMD AB 2766 Fund
Supplies and Expenses 7,613                  7,765                  -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 7,613                  7,765                  -                          -                          -                          
Self-insurance, Bus Fund
Supplies and Expenses 8,970,397           5,243,318           5,391,090           5,905,882           6,310,919           
Subtotal 8,970,397           5,243,318           5,391,090           5,905,882           6,310,919           
Self-insurance, General Liability/Auto Fund
Supplies and Expenses 138,581,173       17,623,743         10,094,358         11,185,047         12,018,454         
Subtotal 138,581,173       17,623,743         10,094,358         11,185,047         12,018,454         
Self-insurance, Risk Management Administration Fund
Salaries and Wages 16,603                16,652                24,882                18,729                19,665                
Supplies and Expenses (2,556,186)          (2,904,635)          (2,987,662)          (3,086,813)          (3,148,721)          
Subtotal (2,539,583)          (2,887,983)          (2,962,780)          (3,068,084)          (3,129,056)          
Self-insurance, Workers' Compensation Fund
Supplies and Expenses 15,790,085         19,038,497         15,961,548         16,580,898         17,007,833         
Subtotal 15,790,085         19,038,497         15,961,548         16,580,898         17,007,833         
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 22,888,247         (504,605)             (5,839,881)          (4,724,515)          (4,925,023)          
Subtotal 22,888,247         (504,605)             (5,839,881)          (4,724,515)          (4,925,023)          
Stormwater Management Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,579,609           1,143,638           1,431,365           1,388,103           1,449,608           
Subtotal 1,579,609           1,143,638           1,431,365           1,388,103           1,449,608           
TORCA Fund
Supplies and Expenses 179,976              24,030                116,472              50,000                50,000                
Subtotal 179,976              24,030                116,472              50,000                50,000                
Vehicle Management Fund
Salaries and Wages 38,042                38,105                28,519                29,945                31,442                
Supplies and Expenses -                          403                     4,874                  5,580                  5,808                  
Subtotal 38,042                38,508                33,393                35,525                37,250                


===== PAGE 234 =====

221
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARiES - NON-DEPARTMENTAL
Non-Dept
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
General Fund
Salaries and Wages 1,019,063$         934,473$            5,904,688$         2,097,754$         1,607,955$         
Supplies and Expenses 126,806,305       55,640,470         54,026,006         55,710,592         55,767,055         
Subtotal 127,825,368       56,574,943         59,930,694         57,808,346         57,375,010         
Airport Fund
Salaries and Wages 7,631                  6,987                  863                     907                     953                     
Supplies and Expenses 402,456              629,728              776,461              770,406              789,866              
Subtotal 410,087              636,715              777,324              771,313              790,819              
Beach Recreation Fund
Salaries and Wages 24,614                23,981                29,578                31,057                32,610                
Supplies and Expenses 108,640              (2,689,033)          (2,483,664)          (3,327,195)          (4,435,281)          
Subtotal 133,254              (2,665,052)          (2,454,086)          (3,296,138)          (4,402,671)          
Big Blue Bus Fund
Salaries and Wages 377,503              395,110              309,469              324,942              341,189              
Supplies and Expenses (67,324)               449,795              (391,932)             (440,885)             (429,190)             
Subtotal 310,179              844,905              (82,463)               (115,943)             (88,001)               
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
Supplies and Expenses 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Subtotal 137,982              123,264              288,850              240,997              243,187              
Cemetery Fund
Salaries and Wages (6,060)                 1,055                  -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses (504,313)             (581,840)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Subtotal (510,373)             (580,785)             (375,660)             (375,464)             (375,409)             
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Subtotal 898,460              3,899,703           3,515,894           3,489,707           3,546,790           
Community Broadband Fund
Salaries and Wages 3,069                  -                          -                          -                          -                          
Supplies and Expenses 222,000              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 225,069              -                          -                          -                          -                          
Gas Tax Fund
Supplies and Expenses 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Subtotal 2,336,845           2,524,107           2,688,969           2,602,980           2,655,040           
Housing Authority Fund
Supplies and Expenses (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Subtotal (71,657)               550,860              353,897              565,024              582,970              
Info Tech Rplcmnt & Serv Fund
Supplies and Expenses -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal -                          (761,063)             -                          -                          -                          
Local Return Fund
Supplies and Expenses 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Subtotal 704,730              641,712              1,223,893           1,223,993           1,224,095           
Low/Moderate Income Housing Asset Fund
Supplies and Expenses 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              
Subtotal 411,564              180,575              389,364              400,000              400,000              
Non-Dept
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Measure GS Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,190,000           18,810,000         17,057,122         490,219              519,780              
Subtotal 1,190,000           18,810,000         17,057,122         490,219              519,780              
Miscellaneous Grants Fund
Supplies and Expenses 912,126              974,278              398,418              420,218              316,889              
Subtotal 912,126              974,278              398,418              420,218              316,889              
Pier Fund
Salaries and Wages 11,351                11,653                9,917                  10,413                10,934                
Supplies and Expenses (2,999,508)          (724,809)             (3,570,382)          (462,143)             (1,809,536)          
Subtotal (2,988,157)          (713,156)             (3,560,465)          (451,730)             (1,798,602)          
Resource Recovery & Recycling Fund
Salaries and Wages 105,855              107,073              94,189                98,899                103,844              
Supplies and Expenses 1,083,309           1,298,770           1,220,015           1,297,532           1,309,797           
Subtotal 1,189,164           1,405,843           1,314,204           1,396,431           1,413,641           
SCAQMD AB 2766 Fund
Supplies and Expenses 7,613                  7,765                  -                          -                          -                          
Subtotal 7,613                  7,765                  -                          -                          -                          
Self-insurance, Bus Fund
Supplies and Expenses 8,970,397           5,243,318           5,391,090           5,905,882           6,310,919           
Subtotal 8,970,397           5,243,318           5,391,090           5,905,882           6,310,919           
Self-insurance, General Liability/Auto Fund
Supplies and Expenses 138,581,173       17,623,743         10,094,358         11,185,047         12,018,454         
Subtotal 138,581,173       17,623,743         10,094,358         11,185,047         12,018,454         
Self-insurance, Risk Management Administration Fund
Salaries and Wages 16,603                16,652                24,882                18,729                19,665                
Supplies and Expenses (2,556,186)          (2,904,635)          (2,987,662)          (3,086,813)          (3,148,721)          
Subtotal (2,539,583)          (2,887,983)          (2,962,780)          (3,068,084)          (3,129,056)          
Self-insurance, Workers' Compensation Fund
Supplies and Expenses 15,790,085         19,038,497         15,961,548         16,580,898         17,007,833         
Subtotal 15,790,085         19,038,497         15,961,548         16,580,898         17,007,833         
Special Revenue Source Fund
Supplies and Expenses 22,888,247         (504,605)             (5,839,881)          (4,724,515)          (4,925,023)          
Subtotal 22,888,247         (504,605)             (5,839,881)          (4,724,515)          (4,925,023)          
Stormwater Management Fund
Supplies and Expenses 1,579,609           1,143,638           1,431,365           1,388,103           1,449,608           
Subtotal 1,579,609           1,143,638           1,431,365           1,388,103           1,449,608           
TORCA Fund
Supplies and Expenses 179,976              24,030                116,472              50,000                50,000                
Subtotal 179,976              24,030                116,472              50,000                50,000                
Vehicle Management Fund
Salaries and Wages 38,042                38,105                28,519                29,945                31,442                
Supplies and Expenses -                          403                     4,874                  5,580                  5,808                  
Subtotal 38,042                38,508                33,393                35,525                37,250                
Non-Dept
EXPENDITURES
2022-23
ACTUAL
2023-24
ACTUAL
2024-25 
REVISED 
BUDGET
2025-26 
PROPOSED
BUDGET
2026-27 
BUDGET
PLAN
Wastewater Fund
Salaries and Wages 29,908                30,733                18,877                19,821                20,812                
Supplies and Expenses (142,584)             (2,987,021)          (2,459,852)          (2,796,992)          (2,881,865)          
Subtotal (112,676)             (2,956,288)          (2,440,975)          (2,777,171)          (2,861,053)          
Water Fund
Salaries and Wages 72,232                73,612                49,169                51,628                54,209                
Supplies and Expenses 16,107,923         1,121,260           1,259,431           1,519,920           1,537,951           
Subtotal 16,180,155         1,194,872           1,308,600           1,571,548           1,592,160           
Total All Funds
Salaries and Wages 1,699,811           1,639,434           6,470,151           2,684,095           2,223,613           
Supplies and Expenses 332,977,868       118,772,910       98,088,994         88,633,091         87,731,017         
Total Non-Departmental 334,677,679$     120,412,344$     104,559,145$     91,317,186$       89,954,630$       


===== PAGE 235 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG

===== PAGE 236 =====

222
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - ORGANiZATiONAL CHART
CITY COUNCIL
MAYOR Lana Negrete / MAYOR PRO TEM Caroline Torosis
COUNCILMEMBER Jesse Zwick / COUNCILMEMBER Dan Hall
COUNCILMEMBER Ellis Raskin / COUNCILMEMBER Barry Snell
COUNCILMEMBER Natalya Zernitskaya
RECORDS & ELECTION  
SERVICES (CITY CLERK)
Nikima Newsome
TRANSPORTATION
Anuj Gupta
FINANCE
Oscar Santiago
INFORMATION SERVICES
Feroz Merchhiya
COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT
Armine Chaparyan
HOUSING AND HUMAN SERVICES
Heather Averick
FIRE
Matthew Hallock
LIBRARY
Erica Cuyugan
POLICE
Ramon Batista
RECREATION AND ARTS
Jenny Rogers
HUMAN RESOURCES
Dana Brown
CITY ATTORNEY
Douglas Sloan
INTERIM CITY MANAGER
Elaine Polachek
PUBLIC WORKS
Rick valte
ASSISTANT 
CITY MANAGER
Susan Cline
DEPUTY
CITY MANAGER
Christopher J. Smith 


===== PAGE 237 =====

223
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - SUMMARY OF PERSONNEL BY FUND
Fund / Department / Employee Type
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
2025-26  
Proposed 
Budget
2025-26
Change
 2026-27 
Budget Plan
2026-27
Change
GENERAL FUND
Permanent Employees 1,226.9    1,270.0    1,283.3    1,286.0    2.7      1,286.0       -      
Temporary Staffing 71.4         78.3         76.0         76.7         0.7      74.2            (2.5)     
General Fund Total 1,298.3    1,348.3    1,359.3    1,362.7    3.4      1,360.2       (2.5)     
NON-GENERAL FUND
Permanent Employees 729.8       748.3       756.3       764.0       7.8      764.0          -      
Temporary Staffing 11.1         9.0           9.0           8.6           (0.5)     8.6              -      
Non-General Fund Total 740.8       757.3       765.3       772.6       7.3      772.6          -      
ALL FUNDS
Permanent Employees 1,956.7    2,018.3    2,039.6    2,050.0    10.5    2,050.0       -      
Temporary Staffing 82.41       87.3         85.0         85.3         0.2      82.8            (2.5)     
Total Personnel & Staffing 2,039.1   2,105.6   2,124.6   2,135.3   10.7   2,132.8     (2.5)    
City Council
Permanent Employees 2.0           2.0           2.0           2.0           -      2.0              -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
City Manager
Permanent Employees 55.0         56.0         57.0         57.0         -      57.0            -      
Temporary Staffing 1.4           1.4           1.0           1.0           -      1.0              -      
City Attorney
Permanent Employees 44.0         44.0         45.0         45.0         -      45.0            -      
Temporary Staffing 0.5           0.5           0.5           0.5           -      0.5              -      
Records & Election Services
Permanent Employees 12.0         13.0         13.0         13.0         -      13.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Community Development
Permanent Employees 82.2         87.2         87.2         87.2         -      87.2            -      
Temporary Staffing 0.8           0.8           0.8           0.8           -      0.8              -      
Community Services
Permanent Employees 85.5         -           -           -           -      -              -      
Temporary Staffing 34.6         -           -           -           -      -              -      
Finance
Permanent Employees 54.3         55.3         55.5         55.5         -      55.5            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fire
Permanent Employees 138.0       137.0       137.0       138.0       1.0      138.0          -      
Temporary Staffing -           0.4           0.4           -           (0.4)     -              -      
TOTAL CITY
GENERAL FUND


===== PAGE 238 =====

224
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - SUMMARY OF PERSONNEL BY FUND
Fund / Department / Employee Type
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
2025-26  
Proposed 
Budget
2025-26
Change
 2026-27 
Budget Plan
2026-27
Change
Housing and Human Services
Permanent Employees -           60.0         61.0         63.3         2.3      63.3            -      
Temporary Staffing -           8.2           8.2           8.2           -      8.2              -      
Human Resources
Permanent Employees 27.0         26.0         27.0         27.0         -      27.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Information Services
Permanent Employees 46.0         53.0         53.0         52.0         (1.0)     52.0            -      
Temporary Staffing 0.5           0.5           0.5           1.4           0.9      1.4              -      
Library
Permanent Employees 53.5         57.5         58.5         58.5         -      58.5            -      
Temporary Staffing 14.5         16.4         15.8         15.8         -      15.8            -      
Police
Permanent Employees 378.5       385.5       390.0       390.0       -      390.0          -      
Temporary Staffing 19.1         20.6         20.6         20.6         -      18.1            (2.5)     
Public Works
Permanent Employees 214.5       219.5       220.0       220.0       -      220.0          -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Recreation and Arts
Permanent Employees -           38.6         39.6         39.8         0.2      39.8            -      
Temporary Staffing -           29.5         28.3         28.5         0.2      28.5            -      
Department of Transportation
Permanent Employees 34.5         35.5         37.5         37.8         0.3      37.8            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 1,226.9    1,270.0    1,283.3    1,286.0    2.7      1,286.0       -      
Temporary Staffing 71.4         78.3         76.0         76.7         0.7      74.2            (2.5)     
General Fund Total 1,298.3   1,348.3   1,359.3   1,362.7   3.4     1,360.2     (2.5)    
Public Works
Permanent Employees 17.0         18.0         18.0         19.0         1.0      19.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 17.0         18.0         18.0         19.0         1.0      19.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Airport Total 17.0        18.0        18.0        19.0        1.0     19.0          -     
GENERAL FUND (continued)
AIRPORT


===== PAGE 239 =====

225
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - SUMMARY OF PERSONNEL BY FUND
Fund / Department / Employee Type
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
2025-26  
Proposed 
Budget
2025-26
Change
 2026-27 
Budget Plan
2026-27
Change
Community Services
Permanent Employees 7.5           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Temporary Staffing 5.8           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Public Works
Permanent Employees 33.0         33.0         33.0         33.0         -      33.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Recreation and Arts
Permanent Employees -           7.5           8.5           9.8           1.3      9.8              -      
Temporary Staffing -           5.8           5.8           5.8           -      5.8              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 40.5         40.5         41.5         42.8         1.3      42.8            -      
Temporary Staffing 5.8           5.8           5.8           5.8           -      5.8              -      
Beach Total 46.3        46.3        47.3        48.6        1.3     48.6          -     
Department of Transportation
Permanent Employees 434.8       437.8       439.8       442.3       2.5      442.3          -      
Temporary Staffing 0.5           0.5           0.5           0.5           -      0.5              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 434.8       437.8       439.8       442.3       2.5      442.3          -      
Temporary Staffing 0.5           0.5           0.5           0.5           -      0.5              -      
Big Blue Bus Total 435.2      438.2      440.2      442.7      2.5     442.7        -     
Public Works
Permanent Employees 7.0           7.0           7.0           7.0           -      7.0              -      
Temporary Staffing -           0.4           0.4           0.4           -      0.4              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 7.0           7.0           7.0           7.0           -      7.0              -      
Temporary Staffing -           0.4           0.4           0.4           -      0.4              -      
Cemetery Total 7.0          7.4          7.4          7.4          -     7.4            -     
Information Services
Permanent Employees 6.0           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 6.0           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Community Broadband Total 6.0          -         -         -         -     -            -     
BEACH
BIG BLUE BUS
CEMETERY
COMMUNITY BROADBAND


===== PAGE 240 =====

226
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - SUMMARY OF PERSONNEL BY FUND
Fund / Department / Employee Type
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
2025-26  
Proposed 
Budget
2025-26
Change
 2026-27 
Budget Plan
2026-27
Change
Community Services
Permanent Employees 13.5         -           -           -           -      -              -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Housing and Human Services
Permanent Employees -           15.0         15.0         15.0         -      15.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 13.5         15.0         15.0         15.0         -      15.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Housing Authority Total 13.5        15.0        15.0        15.0        -     15.0          -     
Community Development
Permanent Employees 2.0           2.0           2.0           2.0           -      2.0              -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Police
Permanent Employees
Temporary Staffing 9.0           9.0           9.0           9.0           -      9.0              -      
1.9           1.9           1.9           1.9           -      1.9              -      
Public Works
Permanent Employees 4.0           4.0           4.0           4.0           -      4.0              -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 15.0         15.0         15.0         15.0         -      15.0            -      
Temporary Staffing 1.9           1.9           1.9           1.9           -      1.9              -      
Pier Total 16.9        16.9        16.9        16.9        -     16.9          -     
Public Works
Permanent Employees 91.0         105.0       105.0       105.0       -      105.0          -      
Temporary Staffing 2.9           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 91.0         105.0       105.0       105.0       -      105.0          -      
Temporary Staffing 2.9           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Resource Recovery & Recycling Total 93.9        105.0      105.0      105.0      -     105.0        -     
PIER
HOUSING AUTHORITY
RESOURCE RECOVERY & RECYCLING


===== PAGE 241 =====

227
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - SUMMARY OF PERSONNEL BY FUND
Fund / Department / Employee Type
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
2025-26  
Proposed 
Budget
2025-26
Change
 2026-27 
Budget Plan
2026-27
Change
Finance
Permanent Employees 12.0         12.0         12.0         13.0         1.0      13.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           0.5           0.5           -           (0.5)     -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 12.0         12.0         12.0         13.0         1.0      13.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           0.5           0.5           -           (0.5)     -              -      
Risk Management Administration Total 12.0        12.5        12.5        13.0        0.5     13.0          -     
Public Works
Permanent Employees 21.0         23.0         23.0         23.0         -      23.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
21.0                                                                                                                                                                                                  21.0                                                                                                                                                                                                  21.0                                                                                                                                                                                                  21.0                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 21.0         23.0         23.0         23.0         -      23.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Vehicle Management  Total 21.0        23.0        23.0        23.0        -     23.0          -     
Public Works
Permanent Employees 20.0         22.0         22.0         23.0         1.0      23.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 20.0         22.0         22.0         23.0         1.0      23.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Wastewater Total 20.0        22.0        22.0        23.0        1.0     23.0          -     
Public Works
Permanent Employees 52.0         53.0         58.0         59.0         1.0      59.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Fund Summary
Permanent Employees 52.0         53.0         58.0         59.0         1.0      59.0            -      
Temporary Staffing -           -           -           -           -      -              -      
Water Total 52.0        53.0        58.0        59.0        1.0     59.0          -     
NON-GENERAL FUNDS SUMMARY
Permanent Employees 729.8       748.3       756.3       764.0       7.8      764.0          -      
Temporary Staffing 11.1         9.0           9.0           8.6           (0.5)     8.6              -      
NON-GENERAL FUNDS TOTAL 740.8      757.3      765.3      772.6      7.3     772.6        0.0     
RISK MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATION
VEHICLE MANAGEMENT
WASTEWATER
WATER


===== PAGE 242 =====

228
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
City Council
Council Office and Legislative Affairs Liaison 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
City Council Total 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
City Council Total 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
CITY MANAGER
Administration
City Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Administrative Analyst (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant - City Manager's Office 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Administrative Staff Assistant - City Manager's Office (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Assistant Administrative Analyst (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Assistant City Manager/Chief Operating Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant to the City Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Communications and Marketing Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Communications and Marketing Coordinator (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Communications and Public Information Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Communications and Public Information Manager (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Community Partnerships Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Community Partnerships Manager (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Customer Service Supervisor -         -         1.0         -         -         
Customer Service Supervisor (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Customer Services Assistant 4.0         4.0         3.0         -         -         
Customer Services Assistant (At-Will) -         -         -         3.0         3.0         
Deputy City Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Equity and Communications Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Equity and Communications Coordinator (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Equity and Inclusion Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Equity and Inclusion Manager (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrator to the City Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Executive Administrator to the City Manager (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Lead Customer Services Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Lead Customer Services Assistant (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Marketing Manager -         1.0         1.0         -         -         
CITY COUNCIL


===== PAGE 243 =====

229
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Marketing Manager (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Production Coordinator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Production Specialist -         -         1.0         -         -         
Production Specialist (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Production Supervisor -         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Production Supervisor (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Public Information Coordinator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Public Information Officer -         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Public Information Officer (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Senior Marketing Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Special Asst to City Mgr - Equity & Community Recovery 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Special Asst to City Mgr - Equity & Community Recovery (At-Will) -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 22.0       22.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       
Temporary Staffing 1.4         1.4         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administration Total 23.4       23.4       24.0       24.0       24.0       
Office of Emergency Management
Chief Resilience Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Computer Aided Dispatch Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Emergency Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Public Safety Dispatch Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Public Safety Dispatch Supervisor 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Public Safety Dispatcher 23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 33.0       34.0       34.0       34.0       34.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Office of Emergency Management Total 33.0       34.0       34.0       34.0       34.0       
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 55.0       56.0       57.0       57.0       57.0       
Temporary Staffing 1.4         1.4         1.0         1.0         1.0         
City Manager Total 56.4       57.4       58.0       58.0       58.0       


===== PAGE 244 =====

230
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
CITY ATTORNEY 
City Attorney
City Attorney 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst - CAO 2.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant City Attorney 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Chief Deputy City Attorney 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Chief Office Administrator - CAO -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Consumer Affairs Specialist 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Deputy City Attorney II/III/IV 21.0       21.0       21.0       21.0       21.0       
Executive Assistant to the City Attorney 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Investigator - Consumer Protection 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Investigator - Criminal Division 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Legal Administrative Services Officer -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Legal Assistant 5.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Legal Secretary 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Office Administrator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Paralegal 2.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Legal Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Legal Analyst-CAO -         2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Senior Legal Analyst-CAO (limited-term) a
-         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Legal Assistant -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Legal Investigator-CAO -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Paralegal -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 44.0       44.0       45.0       45.0       45.0       
Temporary Staffing 0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         
City Attorney Total 44.5       44.5       45.5       45.5       45.5       
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 44.0       44.0       45.0       45.0       45.0       
Temporary Staffing 0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         
City Attorney Total 44.5       44.5       45.5       45.5       45.5       
a. Limited-term position ending December 31, 2027.


===== PAGE 245 =====

231
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
RECORDS & ELECTION SERVICES 
Administration
Director of Records & Election Services (City Clerk) 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst - Records & Election Services 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Asst Director of Records & Election Services (Asst City Clerk) 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Deputy City Clerk 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Records Management Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 3.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 8.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administration Total 8.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         
Support Services
Support Services Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Mail Courier 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Reprographics Specialist II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Support Services Lead 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Support Services Total 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
-                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 12.0       13.0       13.0       13.0       13.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Records & Election Services Total 12.0       13.0       13.0       13.0       13.0       
-                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
Administration
Director of Community Development 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Services Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Deputy Director - Special Projects -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 5.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administration Total 5.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Building & Safety
Building and Safety Manager 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Assistant Building Official -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Plan Check Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Building and Safety Permit Specialist I/II 5.0         5.0         5.0         6.0         6.0         
Building Officer a
1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         


===== PAGE 246 =====

232
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Building Official -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Combination Building Inspector I/II/III 7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Combination Building Inspector II -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Inspection Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Building and Safety Permit Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Combination Building Inspector 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Permit Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Plan Check Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Plans Examiner I/II/III - Mechanical/Plumbing 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Plan Check Engineer 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Revenue Operations Assistant II b
1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Plan Check Engineer 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 29.0       31.0       31.0       31.0       31.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Building & Safety Total 29.0       31.0       31.0       31.0       31.0       
City Planning
Planning Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Planner 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Associate Planner 7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Design and Historic Preservation Planner 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Environmental Planner 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Planner 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Senior Planner 2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Staff Assistant III 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 20.0       21.0       21.0       21.0       21.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
City Planning Total 20.0       21.0       21.0       21.0       21.0       
Code Enforcement
Code Enforcement Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Code Enforcement Officer I/II 12.0       12.0       12.0       12.0       12.0       
Code Enforcement Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Code Enforcement Supervisor 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Lead Code Enforcement Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 19.0       19.0       19.0       19.0       19.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Code Enforcement Total 19.0       19.0       19.0       19.0       19.0       


===== PAGE 247 =====

233
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Economic Development
Economic Development Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Economic Development Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Farmers' Market Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Farmers' Market Attendant 1.2         0.6         0.6         0.6         0.6         
Farmers' Market Coordinator I 1.0         1.6         1.6         1.6         1.6         
Farmers' Market Coordinator II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Farmers' Market Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Development Analyst 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 9.2         10.2       10.2       10.2       10.2       
Temporary Staffing 0.8         0.8         0.8         0.8         0.8         
Economic Development Total 10.0       11.0       11.0       11.0       11.0       
Pier Administration
Pier and Beach Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Business Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Pier Administration Total 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
-                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 84.2       89.2       89.2       89.2       89.2       
Temporary Staffing 0.8         0.8         0.8         0.8         0.8         
 Community Development Total 85.0       90.0       90.0       90.0       90.0       
COMMUNITY SERVICES a
Administration
Director of Community Services 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Assistant Director of Community Services 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Principal Administrative Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 5.0         -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administration Total 5.0         -         -         -         -         
a. The Salary Resolution adopted on March 11, 2025, incorrectly listed the "Assistant Building Officer" position for deletion. The position 
intended for deletion was "Building Officer."
b. Revenue Operations Assistant II position was abolished in FY 2023-24.


===== PAGE 248 =====

234
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Beach House Operations
Beach House Venue Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Beach Recreation Supervisor 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Event Coordinator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Event Coordinator (limited-term) b
0.5         -         -         -         -         
Guest Services Coordinator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Sales and Marketing Coordinator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Venue Services Assistant 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 7.5         -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing 5.8         -         -         -         -         
Beach House Operations Total 13.3       -         -         -         -         
Community Recreation
Community Recreation Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Aquatic Site Supervisor 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Aquatics Program Coordinator 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Aquatics Program Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Chief Pool Lifeguard 2.4         -         -         -         -         
Community Recreation Administrator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Community Services Program Coordinator 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Community Services Program Specialist 2.6         -         -         -         -         
Community Services Program Supervisor 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Guest Services Assistant 2.2         -         -         -         -         
Principal Community Services Supervisor 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Pool Lifeguard 2.4         -         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant III 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 24.6       -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing 26.4       -         -         -         -         
Community Recreation Total 51.0       -         -         -         -         
Cultural Affairs
Cultural Affairs Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Cultural Affairs Administrator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Cultural Affairs Supervisor 2.7         -         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 6.7         -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Cultural Affairs Total 6.7         -         -         -         -         


===== PAGE 249 =====

235
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Housing and Human Services
Housing and Human Services Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Administrative Analyst - Youth and Family Services 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Administrative Staff Assistant 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Community Services Program Coordinator 10.8       -         -         -         -         
Community Services Program Specialist 7.5         -         -         -         -         
Community Services Program Supervisor - Youth & Family 4.0         -         -         -         -         
Housing Program Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Housing Specialist (limited-term) b          1.0            -              -              -              -   
Human Services Administrator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Human Services Administrator - Fiscal 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Human Services Administrator - Youth & Families 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Policy and Performance Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Principal Community Services Supervisor 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Principal Community Services Supervisor - Youth & Family 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Child & Family Resources 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Housing Authority 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Development Analyst 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Human Services Analyst 4.0         -         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant II (limited-term) b
1.0         -         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant III 3.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 49.3       -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing 8.2         -         -         -         -         
Housing and Human Services Total 57.4       -         -         -         -         
Housing Services
Administrative Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Data Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Housing Inspector 0.5         -         -         -         -         
Housing Specialist 5.0         -         -         -         -         
Policy and Performance Analyst 2.0         -         -         -         -         


===== PAGE 250 =====

236
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Senior Administrative Analyst - Financial Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Housing Authority 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant II 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 13.5       -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Housing Services Total 13.5       -         -         -         -         
-                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  
Department Summary -          -          -          -          -          
Permanent Employees 106.5     -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing 40.4       -         -         -         -         
Community Services Total 146.9     -         -         -         -         
FINANCE
Administration
Director of Finance/City Treasurer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 2.0         3.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administration Total 2.0         3.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Budget
Budget Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Budget Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         -         1.0         -         -         
Senior Budget Analyst 2.0         2.0         2.0         3.0         3.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 4.0         4.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Budget Total 4.0         4.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Financial Operations
Financial Operations Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Accountant I 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Accountant II 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Accounts Payable Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Financial Reporting & Systems Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Financial Reporting Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
a. The Community Services Department dissolved and reorganized into two new departments, Housing and Human Services and 
Recreation and Arts.
b. Limited-term position ended June 30, 2023.


===== PAGE 251 =====

237
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Financial Systems & Payroll Administrator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Fiscal Staff Assistant II 3.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Fiscal Staff Assistant III -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Payroll Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Payroll Analyst 3.0         -         -         -         -         
Payroll Analyst I -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Payroll Analyst II -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Payroll Specialist 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Accountant -         1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Grants Analyst 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Supervising Accountant 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 19.0       20.0       20.0       20.0       20.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Financial Operations Total 19.0       20.0       20.0       20.0       20.0       
Procurement
Procurement Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Buyer -         1.0         -         -         -         
Contracts Coordinator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Buyer 1.0         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Procurement Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Buyer 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 7.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Procurement Total 7.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Revenue
Business and Revenue Operations Manager -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Assistant City Treasurer 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Billing Specialist 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Billing Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Business License Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Business License Inspector 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Business License Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fiscal Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Revenue Collections Assistant 2.3         2.3         2.5         2.5         2.5         
Revenue Operations Administrator -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Revenue Operations Specialist 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         


===== PAGE 252 =====

238
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Senior Revenue Collections Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Treasury Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Treasury Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Treasury Operations Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 22.3       22.3       20.5       20.5       20.5       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Revenue Total 22.3       22.3       20.5       20.5       20.5       
Risk Management
Risk Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Liability Claims Adjuster 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Risk Management Analyst -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Risk Management Technician 2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Safety Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Risk Management Analyst 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Supervising Workers Compensation Claim Examiner 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Volunteer Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Workers' Compensation Claims Examiner 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 12.0       12.0       12.0       13.0       13.0       
Temporary Staffing -         0.5         0.5         -         -         
Risk Management Total 12.0       12.5       12.5       13.0       13.0       
-                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  
Department Summary -          -          -          -          -          
Permanent Employees 66.3       67.3       67.5       68.5       68.5       
Temporary Staffing -         0.5         0.5         -         -         
Finance Total 66.3       67.7       68.0       68.5       68.5       
FIRE
Administration
Fire Chief 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Administrative Staff Assistant -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Battalion Chief - Prevention -         1.0         2.0         1.0         1.0         
Deputy Fire Chief 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
EMS Coordinator 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fire Captain - Prevention (Administration) 3.0         3.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fire Equipment Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         
Fire Facilities and Maintenance Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Firefighter - Prevention (limited-term) 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Firefighter Paramedic - Prevention (limited-term) 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Fiscal Staff Assistant II 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Principal Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         


===== PAGE 253 =====

239
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Principal Administrative Analyst - Fire 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Project Support Assistant -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 16.0       15.0       13.0       14.0       14.0       
Temporary Staffing -         0.4         0.4         -         -         
Administration Total 16.0       15.4       13.4       14.0       14.0       
Fire Prevention
Fire Marshal 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Assistant Fire Marshal 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
CUPA Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fire Code Enforcement Officer I/II 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Fire Inspector 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Fire Prevention Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Hazardous Materials Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Fire Inspector 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 15.0       15.0       15.0       14.0       14.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Fire Prevention Total 15.0       15.0       15.0       14.0       14.0       
Fire Suppression & Rescue
Battalion Chief - Suppression 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Fire Captain - Suppression 24.0       27.0       27.0       27.0       27.0       
Fire Engineer - Suppression 27.0       27.0       27.0       27.0       27.0       
Firefighter 28.0       25.0       25.0       25.0       25.0       
Firefighter Paramedic 23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 105.0     105.0     105.0     105.0     105.0     
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Fire Suppression & Rescue Total 105.0     105.0     105.0     105.0     105.0     
Training
Battalion Chief - Prevention (Training) 1.0         1.0         -         1.0         1.0         
Fire Captain - Prevention (Training) 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 2.0         2.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Training Total 2.0         2.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         


===== PAGE 254 =====

240
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Emergency Medical Services 
Battalion Chief - Prevention -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
EMS Coordinator -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fire Captain - Prevention -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         -         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Training Total -         -         3.0         3.0         3.0         
-                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 138.0     137.0     137.0     138.0     138.0     
Temporary Staffing -         0.4         0.4         -         -         
Fire Total 138.0     137.4     137.4     138.0     138.0     
HOUSING AND HUMAN SERVICES a
Administration
Director of Housing and Human Services -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Services Officer -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Coordinator b
-         1.0         -         -         -         
Assistant Director of Housing & Human Services -         1.0         -         -         -         
Communications and Marketing Coordinator -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         6.0         5.0         6.0         6.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administration Total -         6.0         5.0         6.0         6.0         
Housing
Housing Manager -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Affordable Housing Development Administrator -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Data Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Housing Program Manager -         1.0         -         -         -         
Housing Specialist -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Policy and Performance Analyst -         1.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Development Analyst -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Housing Specialist -         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Staff Assistant II -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         11.0       11.0       11.0       11.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Housing Total -         11.0       11.0       11.0       11.0       


===== PAGE 255 =====

241
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Human Services
Human Services Manager -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst - Youth and Family Services -         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Administrative Staff Assistant -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Community Services Program Coordinator -         11.8       11.8       12.0       12.0       
Community Services Program Specialist -         8.3         8.3         8.3         8.3         
Community Services Program Supervisor - Youth & Family -         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Homelessness Prevention andIntervention Manager -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Human Services Administrator -         1.0         -         -         -         
Human Services Administrator - Fiscal -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Human Services Administrator - Youth and Families -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Policy and Performance Analyst -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Principal Community Services Supervisor -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Principal Community Services Supervisor - Youth & Family -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         1.0         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Child & Family Resources -         2.0         2.0         3.0         3.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Human Services/Fiscal -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Homelessness Prevention and Intervention Analyst -         -         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Senior Housing Specialist -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Human Services Analyst -         4.0         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant III -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         43.0       45.0       46.3       46.3       
Temporary Staffing -         8.2         8.2         8.2         8.2         
Human Services Total -         51.2       53.2       54.4       54.4       
Section 8 Administration
Housing Authority Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Housing Inspector -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Housing Specialist -         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Policy and Performance Analyst -         2.0         2.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Financial Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Housing Authority -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         


===== PAGE 256 =====

242
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Staff Assistant II -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Supervising Housing Specialist -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         15.0       15.0       15.0       15.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Section 8 Administration Total -         15.0       15.0       15.0       15.0       
-                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                  
Department Summary
Permanent Employees -         75.0       76.0       78.3       78.3       
Temporary Staffing -         8.2         8.2         8.2         8.2         
Housing and Human Services Total -         83.2       84.2       86.4       86.4       
HUMAN RESOURCES 
Administrative Services
Director of Human Resources -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Director of Human Resources/Chief People Officer 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Administrative Services Officer -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Deputy Director - Special Projects 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Executive Administrative Assistant - Human Resources 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Human Resources Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Human Resources Information Systems Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Human Resources Technician 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Human Resources Analyst 1.0         2.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 8.0         8.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administrative Services Total 8.0         8.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Employment & Classification
Human Resources Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Benefits Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Employee Benefits Specialist -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Human Resources Analyst 5.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Human Resources Technician 2.0         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Human Resources Technician (limited-term) a
1.0         -         -         -         -         
Senior Human Resources Analyst 2.0         2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Staff Assistant III -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 11.0       11.0       13.0       13.0       13.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Employment & Classification Total 11.0       11.0       13.0       13.0       13.0       
b. Position transferred from Housing and Human Services Department.	 	 	
a. The Community Services Department dissolved and reorganized into two new departments, Housing and 
Human Services and Recreation and Arts.


===== PAGE 257 =====

243
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Labor & Employee Relations
Assistant Director of Human Resources 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Human Resources Manager -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Human Resources Analyst 3.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Human Resources Technician -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Human Resources Analyst 2.0         2.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 6.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Labor & Employee Relations Total 6.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Organizational Development & Employee Benefits
Employee Benefits Specialist 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Organizational Development & Employee Benefits Total 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 27.0       26.0       27.0       27.0       27.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Human Resources Total 27.0       26.0       27.0       27.0       27.0       
INFORMATION SERVICES a
Strategy and Operations
Chief Information Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Administrative Services Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Information Security Analyst 2.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Information Security Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Principal Information Security Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Project Portfolio Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Project Support Assistant 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Technology Training Coordinator 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 10.0       9.0         8.0         7.0         7.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Strategy and Operations Total 10.0       9.0         8.0         7.0         7.0         
Community Broadband b
Community Broadband Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Community Broadband Manager 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
a. Limited-term position ended June 30, 2023.


===== PAGE 258 =====

244
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Broadband Services Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Communications Engineer -         -         1.0         1.0         
Network Construction Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Principal Network Engineer 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 6.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Community Broadband Total 6.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Customer Experience and Support
Customer Experience and Support Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Business Process Technology Analyst 5.0         7.0         7.0         -         -         
Business Process Technology Analyst (limited-term) c 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Client Services Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Client Services Technician -         4.0         4.0         -         -         
Communications Systems Technician -         -         1.0         -         -         
Computer Support Technician II 4.0         -         -         -         -         
Principal Business Process Technology Analyst 4.0         4.0         4.0         -         -         
SCADA Systems Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Technical Services Analyst 3.0         3.0         3.0         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 20.0       21.0       22.0       -         -         
Temporary Staffing 0.5         0.5         0.5         -         -         
Customer Experience & Support Total 20.5       21.5       22.5       -         -         
Digital Transformation and Development
Enterprise Architect and Digital Development Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Business Process Technology Analyst -         1.0         1.0         8.0         8.0         
Communications Systems Technician -         1.0         1.0         
GIS Analyst 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
GIS Technician -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Business Process Technology Analyst -         -         -         5.0         5.0         
Principal Software Developer -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
SCADA Systems Analyst -         1.0         1.0         
Software Developer 3.0         3.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Systems Engineer 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Technical Services Analyst -         -         -         3.0         3.0         
Technology Program Manager d
-         -         -         2.0         2.0         
User Experience Designer 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 8.0         9.0         9.0         27.0       27.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         0.9         0.9         
Digital Transformation & Development Total 8.0         9.0         9.0         27.9       27.9       


===== PAGE 259 =====

245
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Infrastructure and Cloud Services
Infrastructure & Cloud Services Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Business Process Technology Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Client Services Supervisor -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Client Services Technician -         -         -         4.0         4.0         
Communications Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Network Engineer 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Principal Network Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Systems Engineer -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Systems Engineer 2.0         3.0         2.0         3.0         3.0         
Systems Policy Engineer -         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 8.0         10.0       10.0       14.0       14.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         0.5         0.5         
Infrastructure and Cloud Services Total 8.0         10.0       10.0       14.5       14.5       
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 52.0       53.0       53.0       52.0       52.0       
Temporary Staffing 0.5         0.5         0.5         1.4         1.4         
Information Services Total 52.5       53.5       53.5       53.4       53.4       
LIBRARY a
Administration and Business Services (formerly Administration and Facilities)
Director of Library Services/City Librarian 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant City Librarian 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Communications and Marketing Coordinator -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Library Services Officer -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Librarian II 2.0         2.0         -         -         -         
Librarian III - Adult & Neighborhood Services 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Library Assistant II 7.0         4.0         -         -         -         
Library Assistant II (limited-term) b
1.0         -         -         -         -         
Library Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Library Literacy Program Assistant (limited-term) -         1.0         -         -         -         
Library Services Officer 6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Library Services Officer Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
a. Department reorganization.
b. Effective FY 2023-24, the Community Broadband Fund has been consolidated into the General Fund.
c. Limited-term position ended June 30, 2023.
d. Subject to Personnel Board approval.


===== PAGE 260 =====

246
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Principal Librarian - Reference Services 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Library Administrative Services          1.0          1.0 -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst - Library Fiscal Services Coordinator    1.0    1.0 -         -         -         
Staff Assistant III    1.0    1.0 -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 26.0       24.0       15.0       15.0       15.0       
Temporary Staffing 14.1       16.0       15.8       15.8       15.8       
Administration and Business Services Total 40.1       40.0       30.8       30.8       30.8       
Collections, Technology and Patron Services (formerly Information Management)
Principal Librarian - Collections, Technology and Patron Services -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Librarian - Information Management 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Circulation Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Librarian I 3.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Librarian II 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Librarian III - Collections & Technology 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Library Assistant II 4.5         9.5         9.5         9.5         9.5         
Library Assistant III 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Library Assistant III (limited-term) 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 13.5       18.5       18.5       18.5       18.5       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Collections, Technology and Patron Services Total 13.5       18.5       18.5       18.5       18.5       
Community Engagement and Programming (formerly Public and Branch Services)
Principal Librarian - Community Engagement & Programming -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Librarian - Public & Branch Services 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Librarian I 7.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         
Librarian II 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Librarian III - Adult & Neighborhood Services 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Librarian III - Youth and Family Services 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Library Assistant III -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Library Literacy Program Assistant 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Library Program Specialist - Literacy Services -         1.0         -         -         -         
Library Program Specialist - Youth and Family Services 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 14.0       15.0       14.0       14.0       14.0       
Temporary Staffing 0.4         0.4         -         -         -         
Community Engagement and Programming Total 14.4       15.4       14.0       14.0       14.0       
Public and Branch Services (formerly Reference Services)
Principal Librarian - Branch and Neighborhood Services -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Librarian II -         -         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Librarian III - Adult & Neighborhood Services -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Library Assistant II -         -         4.0         4.0         4.0         


===== PAGE 261 =====

247
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Library Assistant III -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Library Literacy Program Assistant (limited-term) c
-         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Library Program Specialist - Literacy Services -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         -         11.0       11.0       11.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Reference Services Total -         -         11.0       11.0       11.0       
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 53.5       57.5       58.5       58.5       58.5       
Temporary Staffing 14.5       16.4       15.8       15.8       15.8       
Library Total 68.0       73.9       74.3       74.3       74.3       
POLICE
Office of Chief of Police
Police Chief 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Crime Prevention Coordinator 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Deputy Police Chief 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Police Lieutenant 4.0         3.0         3.0         2.0         2.0         
Police Officer 16.0       17.0       17.0       11.0       11.0       
Police Sergeant 4.0         4.0         4.0         3.0         3.0         
Public Information Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 2.0         2.0         2.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 33.0       33.0       33.0       24.0       24.0       
Temporary Staffing 0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         
Office of Chief of Police Total 33.5       33.5       33.5       24.5       24.5       
Criminal Investigations
Police Captain 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Court Services Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Custody Officer 14.0       14.0       14.0       14.0       14.0       
Custody Officer Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Forensic Specialist 6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Forensic Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Forensic Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Investigative Intelligence Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Jail Services Attendant 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Lead Custody Officer 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Lead Forensic Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Police Records Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
a. Department reorganization.
b. Limited-term position ended June 30, 2023.
c. Limited-term position ending June 30, 2026.


===== PAGE 262 =====

248
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Police Lieutenant 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Police Officer 32.0       34.0       34.0       35.0       35.0       
Police Property Evidence Clerk 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Police Records Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Police Records Supervisor 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Police Records Technician 11.0       11.0       11.0       11.0       11.0       
Police Sergeant 5.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Property/Evidence Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Public Services Administrator - Forensics 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Public Services Administrator - Jail 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Youth and Family Services Program Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 94.0       95.0       95.0       96.0       96.0       
Temporary Staffing 1.5         1.5         1.5         1.5         0.5         
Criminal Investigations Total 95.5       96.5       96.5       97.5       96.5       
Harbor Unit
Pier & Harbor Services Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Pier & Harbor Services Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Pier and Harbor Services Officer 7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         
Temporary Staffing 1.9         1.9         1.9         1.9         1.9         
Harbor Unit Total 10.9       10.9       10.9       10.9       10.9       
Patrol Operations
Police Captain 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Community Services Officer 8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         
Crime Analyst II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Community Services Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Police Lieutenant 3.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Police Officer 100.0     96.0       100.0     100.0     100.0     
Police Sergeant 18.0       20.0       20.0       19.0       19.0       
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 133.0     133.0     137.0     136.0     136.0     
Temporary Staffing 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         -         
Patrol Operations Total 134.0     134.0     138.0     137.0     136.0     
Professional Services
Police Captain 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Animal Control Officer 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Animal Control Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Animal Control Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Police Lieutenant 1.0         1.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         


===== PAGE 263 =====

249
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Police Officer 3.0         3.0         3.0         9.0         9.0         
Police Personnel Services Technician 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Police Sergeant 2.0         1.0         1.0         3.0         3.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Public Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant II 1.0         1.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 22.0       21.0       21.0       31.0       31.0       
Temporary Staffing 1.4         2.9         2.9         2.9         2.9         
Professional Services Total 23.4       23.9       23.9       33.9       33.9       
Special Operations
Police Captain 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Crime Analyst II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Crossing Guard Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Crossing Guard 0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         
Lead Public Services Officer 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Lead Traffic Services Officer 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Parking Citation Review Officer -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Police Lieutenant 3.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Police Officer 18.0       25.0       25.0       24.0       24.0       
Police Sergeant 4.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Public Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Public Services Officer 25.0       25.0       25.0       25.0       25.0       
Public Services Officer Supervisor 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Traffic Services Officer 30.0       30.0       29.5       29.5       29.5       
Traffic Services Supervisor 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 96.5       103.5     104.0     103.0     103.0     
Temporary Staffing 14.7       14.7       14.7       14.7       14.2       
Special Operations Total 111.2     118.2     118.7     117.7     117.2     
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 387.5     394.5     399.0     399.0     399.0     
Temporary Staffing 21.0       22.5       22.5       22.5       20.0       
Police Total 408.5     417.0     421.5     421.5     419.0     


===== PAGE 264 =====

250
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
PUBLIC WORKS
Administrative Services
Director of Public Works 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Services Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Director of Public Works 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Chief Operations Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Chief Operations Officer - Airport Director 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administrative Services Total 9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         
Airport
Airport Operations and Facilities Manager a
-         -         1.0         1.0         
Airport Operations Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Airport Operations Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Airport Operations Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Airport Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Property Management Specialist -         -         -         2.0         2.0         
Property Management Specialist (limited-term) b
2.0         2.0         2.0         -         -         
Real Estate Property Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Real Estate Property Manager a
-         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         3.0         3.0         
Staff Assistant III (limited-term) b
1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 10.0       10.0       10.0       11.0       11.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Airport Total 10.0       10.0       10.0       11.0       11.0       
Airport Maintenance
Airport Maintenance Worker 3.0         3.0         3.0         5.0         5.0         
Airport Maintenance Worker (limited-term) b
1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Building Systems Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Facilities Supervisor -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Facilities Supervisor (limited-term) b
1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Maintenance Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Trades Intern -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Trades Intern (limited-term) b
-         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 7.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Airport Maintenance Total 7.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         


===== PAGE 265 =====

251
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Architecture Services
City Architect a
-         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Capital Program Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Coordinator c
-         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Architectural Associate 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
CIP Project Manager 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
CIP Project Manager (limited-term) b
1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Design and Planning Manager (limited-term) b
-         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Project Support Assistant 2.0         2.0         2.0         3.0         3.0         
Project Support Assistant  (limited-term) b
-         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Public Works Construction Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Construction Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Design Manager 3.0         3.0         3.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Park Planner 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 15.0       17.0       18.0       18.0       18.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Architecture Services Total 15.0       17.0       18.0       18.0       18.0       
Beach House Maintenance
Aquatics Maintenance Worker 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Custodian I 6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Custodian II 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 10.0       10.0       10.0       10.0       10.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Beach House Maintenance Total 10.0       10.0       10.0       10.0       10.0       
Beach Maintenance
Beach Maintenance Supervisor 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Custodian I 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Equipment Operator I 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Equipment Operator II 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Maintenance Crew Leader 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Maintenance Worker 12.0       12.0       12.0       12.0       12.0       
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Beach Maintenance Total 23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       
Cemetery
Cemetery Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst - Cemetery 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Cemetery Crew Leader -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Equipment Operator I 2.0         2.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Equipment Operator II 1.0         -         -         -         -         


===== PAGE 266 =====

252
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Funeral Services Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Maintenance Worker -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Temporary Staffing -         0.4         0.4         0.4         0.4         
Cemetery Total 7.0         7.4         7.4         7.4         7.4         
Engineering & Street Services
City Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Business Assistant -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
CIP Project Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Civil Engineer 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Civil Engineering Assistant 2.0         2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Civil Engineering Associate 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Concrete Finisher 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Electrical Crew Leader 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Electrician -         -         1.0         -         -         
Electrician II 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Engineering Support Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Engineering Technician 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Principal Civil Engineer 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Project Support Assistant 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Public Works Inspector 1.5         1.5         -         -         -         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Senior Civil Engineer -         -         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Public Works Inspector 3.0         3.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Street Services Crew Leader 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Street Services Superintendent 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Street Services Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Street Services Worker I 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Street Services Worker II 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Supervising Civil Engineer 2.0         2.0         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 40.5       40.5       40.0       38.0       38.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Engineering & Street Services Total 40.5       40.5       40.0       38.0       38.0       
Facilities Maintenance
Facilities Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Building Systems Technician 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Carpenter 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Carpenter Crew Leader 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Custodial Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Custodial Supervisor 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Custodian I 30.0       30.0       30.0       30.0       30.0       


===== PAGE 267 =====

253
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Custodian II 8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         
Electrical Crew Leader 1.0         1.0         1.0         2.0         2.0         
Electrician -         -         3.0         4.0         4.0         
Electrician II 3.0         3.0         -         -         -         
Equipment Operator I 8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         
Facilities Supervisor 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Graffiti Removal Technician 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
HVAC Assistant 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
HVAC Crew Leader 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
HVAC Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Maintenance Crew Leader 2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Maintenance Worker 13.0       15.0       15.0       15.0       15.0       
Plumber 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Plumber Crew Leader 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Promenade Maintenance Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 91.0       94.0       94.0       96.0       96.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Facilities Maintenance Total 91.0       94.0       94.0       96.0       96.0       
Fleet Management
Fleet Maintenance Superintendent 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fleet Maintenance Supervisor 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Fleet Services Writer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Mechanic I/II 13.0       14.0       14.0       14.0       14.0       
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Mechanic 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Welder -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Welder Fabricator 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 21.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Fleet Management Total 21.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       23.0       
Office of Sustainability & the Environment
Chief Sustainability Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Community Services Program Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Sustainability Analyst 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Sustainability Analyst 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Office of Sustainability & the Environment Total 9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         


===== PAGE 268 =====

254
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Pier Maintenance
Carpenter 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Painter 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Pier Maintenance Worker 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Pier Maintenance Total 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Public Landscape
Public Landscape Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Aquatics Maintenance Worker 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Beach Maintenance Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Equipment Operator I 6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Groundskeeper 22.0       22.0       21.0       21.0       21.0       
Irrigation Technician 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Maintenance Assistant 3.0         3.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Parks Equipment Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Parks Maintenance Crew Leader 2.0         2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Parks Maintenance Supervisor 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Public Landscape Administrator 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Urban Forest Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Urban Forest Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 50.0       50.0       50.0       50.0       50.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Public Landscape Total 50.0       50.0       50.0       50.0       50.0       
Resource Recovery & Recycling
Resource Recovery & Recycling Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Bin Truck Driver 7.0         17.0       17.0       17.0       17.0       
Dispatcher 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Equipment Operator I 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Hazardous Materials Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Resource Recovery & Recycling Billing Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Maintenance Assistant 9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         9.0         
Maintenance Worker 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Motor Sweeper Operator 5.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Project Support Assistant 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Resource Recovery & Recycling Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Resource Recovery & Recycling Business Supervisor -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Resource Recovery & Recycling Collection Superintendent -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Resource Recovery & Recycling Crew Leader 2.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         


===== PAGE 269 =====

255
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Resource Recovery & Recycling Equipment Operator 42.0       47.0       47.0       47.0       47.0       
Resource Recovery & Recycling Equipment Operator (limited-term) d          2.0            -              -              -              -   
Resource Recovery & Recycling Supervisor 4.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Sustainability Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         -         -         
Senior Zero Waste Analyst a            -              -              -            1.0          1.0 
Staff Assistant III 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Trades Intern (limited-term) d
2.0         -         -         -         -         
Zero Waste Assistant 1.0         2.0         -         -         -         
Zero Waste Specialist -         -         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 91.0       105.0     105.0     105.0     105.0     
Temporary Staffing 2.9         -         -         -         -         
Resource Recovery & Recycling Total 93.9       105.0     105.0     105.0     105.0     
Wastewater
Water Resources Protection Programs Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Water Resources Protection Specialist 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Wastewater Collections Worker II 10.0       10.0       10.0       10.0       10.0       
Wastewater Collections Worker III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Wastewater Crew Leader 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Wastewater Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator II 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Water Chemist -         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Water Resources Protection Specialist 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 20.0       22.0       22.0       23.0       23.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Wastewater Total 20.0       22.0       22.0       23.0       23.0       
Water Resources
Water Utilities Manager -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Water Resources Manager 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
CIP Project Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Civil Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Engineering Support Services Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Environmental Remediation Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Field Inspector I 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Field Inspector II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Water Chemist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Civil Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Process Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Project Support Assistant -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Sustainability Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         


===== PAGE 270 =====

256
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Senior Water Production and Treatment Plant Operator 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Staff Assistant III 2.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Trades Intern -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Trades Intern (limited-term) d
1.0         -         -         -         -         
Underground Utility Safety Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Water Chemist 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Water Crew Leader 4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Water Distribution Supervisor 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Water Maintenance Worker II 5.0         6.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         
Water Production and Treatment Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Water Production and Treatment Operator II 6.0         6.0         8.0         8.0         8.0         
Water Production and Treatment Plant Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Water Quality Analyst II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Water Quality Supervisor a
-         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Water Resources Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Water Resources Technician 5.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Water Utility Worker II 5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Water/Wastewater Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 52.0       53.0       58.0       59.0       59.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Water Resources Total 52.0       53.0       58.0       59.0       59.0       
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 459.5     484.5     490.0     493.0     493.0     
Temporary Staffing 2.9         0.4         0.4         0.4         0.4         
Public Works Total 462.4     484.9     490.4     493.4     493.4     
c. Position transferred from Housing and Human Services Department.
d. Limited-term position ended June 30, 2023.
a. Subject to Personnel Board approval.
b. Limited-term position ending December 31, 2028.


===== PAGE 271 =====

257
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
RECREATION AND ARTS a
Administration
Director of Recreation and Arts -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Services Officer -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Community Recreation Administrator -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Executive Administrative Assistant -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         -         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         3.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Administration Total -         3.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Beach House Operations
Beach House Venue Manager -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Beach Recreation Supervisor -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Cultural Affairs Venue Supervisor -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Event Coordinator -         1.5         1.5         2.0         2.0         
Guest Services Coordinator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Sales and Marketing Coordinator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III -         -         0.8         0.8         
Venue Services Assistant -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         7.5         8.5         9.8         9.8         
Temporary Staffing -         5.8         5.8         5.8         5.8         
Beach House Operations Total -         13.3       14.3       15.6       15.6       
Community Recreation
Community Recreation Manager -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant -         1.0         -         -         -         
Aquatic Site Supervisor -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Aquatics Program Coordinator -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Aquatics Program Manager -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Chief Pool Lifeguard -         2.4         2.4         2.4         2.4         
Community Recreation Administrator -         1.0         -         -         -         
Community Services Program Coordinator -         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Community Services Program Specialist -         2.6         2.6         2.6         2.6         
Community Services Program Supervisor -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         


===== PAGE 272 =====

258
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Guest Services Assistant -         3.2         3.2         3.4         3.4         
Principal Community Services Supervisor -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Pool Lifeguard -         2.4         2.4         2.4         2.4         
Staff Assistant III -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         27.6       25.6       25.8       25.8       
Temporary Staffing -         29.5       28.3       28.5       28.5       
Community Recreation Total -         57.1       53.9       54.3       54.3       
Cultural Affairs
Cultural Affairs Manager -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Cultural Affairs Administrator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Cultural Affairs Supervisor -         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -         1.0         -         -         -         
Staff Assistant III -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees -         8.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Cultural Affairs Total -         8.0         7.0         7.0         7.0         
Department Summary
Permanent Employees -         46.1       48.1       49.6       49.6       
Temporary Staffing -         35.3       34.1       34.3       34.3       
Recreation and Arts Total -         81.4       82.2       83.8       83.8       
TRANSPORTATION 
Finance & Administrative Services 
Director of Transportation -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Accountant II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Services Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Administrative Analyst 1.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Assistant Director of Transportation -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Director, Department of Transportation 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Customer Experience and Innovation Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Director, Department of Transportation 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Executive Administrative Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fiscal Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst -  Transit Grants 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
a. The Community Services Department dissolved and reorganized into two new departments, Housing and Human Services and 
Recreation and Arts.


===== PAGE 273 =====

259
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Transit Chief Administrative Officer -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Finance and Grants Manager 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Transit Government Relations Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 14.0       15.0       17.0       17.0       17.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Finance and Administrative Services Total 14.0       15.0       17.0       17.0       17.0       
Community Engagement & Customer Experience
Community Engagement and Customer Experience Manager    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0 
Assistant Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         
Community Engagement Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Customer Service Supervisor -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Customer Services Assistant 5.3         5.3         5.3         4.8         4.8         
Graphic Designer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Customer Services Assistant 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Transit Government Relations Officer 1.0         1.0         -         -         -         
Transportation Marketing Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 11.3       11.3       10.3       10.8       10.8       
Temporary Staffing 0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         
Community Engagement & Customer Experience Total 11.7       11.7       10.7       11.2       11.2       
Maintenance
Transit Maintenance Administrator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
LCNG Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Motor Coach Cleaner 17.0       17.0       17.0       17.0       17.0       
Motor Coach Cleaner Supervisor -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Transit Maintenance Worker 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Storekeeper 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Storekeeper II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Trades Intern -         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Trades Intern (limited-term) 2.0         -         -         -         -         
Transit Facilities Maintenance Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Maintenance Quality Assurance Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Maintenance Worker 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Mechanic I/II 47.0       47.0       47.0       47.0       47.0       
Transit Mechanic Supervisor 6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         6.0         
Transit Vehicle Maintenance Superintendent 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Warehouse Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 87.0       88.0       88.0       88.0       88.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Maintenance Total 87.0       88.0       88.0       88.0       88.0       


===== PAGE 274 =====

260
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Mobility
Mobility Manager 1.0   1.0   1.0   1.0   1.0   
City Traffic Engineer -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Traffic Signal Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Traffic Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Principal Transportation Planner 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Transportation Planner 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Senior Transportation Planner - Bicycle Program 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Traffic Engineer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Traffic Operations Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Traffic Painter -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Traffic Painter Crew Leader 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Traffic Signal Technician 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Transportation Demand Program Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transportation Management Coordinator -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transportation Management Specialist 3.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Transportation Planning Assistant 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Transportation Planning Associate 3.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Transportation Planning Technician 0.5         0.5         0.5         0.8         0.8         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 23.5       24.5       25.5       25.8       25.8       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Mobility Total 23.5       24.5       25.5       25.8       25.8       
Operations
Chief Operations Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Staff Assistant 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Motor Coach Operator 285.5     285.5     285.5     285.5     285.5     
Motor Coach Operator Supervisor 18.0       18.0       18.0       18.0       18.0       
Motor Coach Operator Supervisor (limited-term) a
-         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant II 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Operations Superintendent 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 308.5     308.5     308.5     309.5     309.5     
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Operations Total 308.5     308.5     308.5     309.5     309.5     
Parking Operations
Parking Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Customer Service Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Fiscal Staff Assistant III -         -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Lead Parking Meter Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Parking Meter Technician 2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         2.0         
Parking Operations Specialist 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         


===== PAGE 275 =====

261
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
PERSONNEL AND STAFFiNG - PERSONNEL BY DEPARTMENT AND DiviSiON
Department / Division / Title
(All Titles in Alphabetical Order, except for the division lead)
(FTE counts rounded to nearest tenth)
 2022-23 
Revised 
Budget
 2023-24 
Revised 
Budget
 2024-25 
Revised 
Budget
 2025-26 
Proposed 
Budget
2026-27 
Budget 
Plan
Parking Permits Assistant 3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         3.0         
Principal Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Senior Administrative Analyst 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 11.0       11.0       12.0       12.0       12.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Parking Operations Total 11.0       11.0       12.0       12.0       12.0       
Planning & Performance
Chief Planning Officer -         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Planning and Performance Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst -         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Assistant Administrative Analyst 1.0         -         -         -         -         
Strategic Transit Planner 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Planner 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 4.0         4.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Planning & Performance Total 4.0         4.0         5.0         5.0         5.0         
Safety & Training
Transit Safety and Training Manager 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Administrative Analyst (limited-term) a
-         -         -         1.0         1.0         
Staff Assistant III 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Maintenance Safety Training Coordinator 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Safety Officer 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Safety, Security and Training Technician 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Training Coordinator 3.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         4.0         
Transit Training Coordinator (limited-term) a
1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Transit Training Supervisor 1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         1.0         
Division Summary
Permanent Employees 10.0       11.0       11.0       12.0       12.0       
Temporary Staffing -         -         -         -         -         
Safety & Training Total 10.0       11.0       11.0       12.0       12.0       
Department Summary
Permanent Employees 469.3     473.3     477.3     480.0     480.0     
Temporary Staffing 0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5         
Transportation Total 469.7     473.7     477.7     480.5     480.5     
a. Limited-term position ending June 30, 2027.


===== PAGE 276 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM

===== PAGE 277 =====

262
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
FY 2025-26 THROUGH FY 2028-29 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM 
The Capital improvement Program (CiP) budget process is a five-year planning cycle and is updated biennially. On 
June 25, 2024, Council adopted the first year and approved the second year of the FY 2024-26 Biennial Capital 
improvement Program Budget. in the face of the pandemic’s impact on capital project and construction program 
resources, only a very limited number of projects were approved in the FY 2024-26 Biennial CiP Budget cycle. 
Those projects represented critical infrastructure needs, projects that could not be deferred without compromising 
essential operations or public health and safety, and projects that would generate revenue.  The changes outlined 
in this Addendum are revisions to the second year of the approved Biennial Budget, FY 2024-26. These changes 
are limited to priority needs that have arisen during the first year of the Biennial Budget and cannot be deferred 
until the next biennial budget process.  However, absent new General Fund resources, departments did identify 
alternative funding options, such as grant resources, Gas Tax Funds, Water and Wastewater Enterprise Funds, 
Resource Recovery and Recycling and Airport Enterprise Fund resources to fund CiP projects.   
FY 2026-29 budget plan amounts are included as a planning tool to demonstrate total anticipated capital funding 
needs. However, project needs will be re-evaluated during each biennial budget cycle to ensure that budgets are 
adjusted to fall within available funding limits and to best reflect updated City priorities.   
DEFINITION OF CAPITAL PROJECTS 
The Capital improvement Program is a five-year financial plan for the acquisition, expansion or rehabilitation of 
land, buildings and other major infrastructure. Projects included in the CiP budget are those with costs exceeding 
$50,000 and with useful lives of more than three years; most involve public infrastructure construction or major 
equipment procurement. 
FY 2025-26 EXCEPTION-BASED CIP BUDGET
The exception-based budget process occurs in the second year of the biennial budget period, and only projects that 
are highly urgent are considered. Project requests are submitted to and evaluated by the CiP Team comprised of 
the City Manager, Assistant City Manager, Director of Finance, and the Director of Public Works which recommends 
funding or provides feedback for projects best reflecting current City priorities. CiP Project applications are also 
evaluated within the context of available funding limits to ensure that extremely limited resources fund priority 
projects while maintaining the City’s existing infrastructure and minimize future replacement costs. Capital budget 
recommendations are presented to City Council and the community for consideration.  
Changes to the FY 2025-26 CiP Budget as part of the CiP Exception-Based Budgeting process include: 
• New allocation of Clean Beaches Fund; 
• New allocation of Airport Funds for one vehicle that requires immediate funding; 
• increases and decreases in allocations to existing projects based on revised estimates and available 
restricted funding; 
• Allocation of local and grant resources. 


===== PAGE 278 =====

263
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
REVISED BUDGET SUMMARY 
The revised FY 2025-26 CiP Budget totals $108.5 million. This represents a decrease of $8.8 million from the 
originally approved FY 2025-26 CiP Budget. Of the total FY 2025-26 CiP budget, the General Fund portion 
represents $15.1 million or 13.97 percent. Total budget amounts represent major project support to water projects 
identified in the Sustainable Waster Master Plan, Water and Wastewater Main Replacement projects, and ongoing 
maintenance projects.  
CIP BUDGET SUMMARY BY FUND
GENERAL FUND BUDGET CHANGES
No additional new projects were funded as part of the FY 2025-26 Exception-based CiP budget for the general 
fund.  
FUND
PROPOSED 
BUDGET
BUDGET PLAN
FY2025-26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
(01) General Fund $15,160,829 $19,500,552 $19,614,775 $19,764,676 
(10) Special Revenue $1,050,000 $650,000 $1,450,000 $250,000 
(11) Beach Recreation $797,020 $2,284,231 $2,106,443 $1,994,537 
(12) Housing Authority $45,089 $55,368 $58,563 $61,968 
(16) Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax - Measure V $1,600,000 $1,150,000 $50,000 $50,000 
(18) SC AQMD $120,000 $0 $0 $0 
(19) Community Development Block Grant $950,000 $0 $0 $0 
(20) Miscellaneous Grants Fund $15,427,214 $14,161,625 $1,000,000 $0 
(26) Gas Tax Fund $2,447,236 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 
(27) Local Return $8,308,749 $4,125,000 $3,800,000 $3,800,000 
(50) Water $16,133,342 $25,786,048 $32,132,446 $23,330,008 
(51) Wastewater $15,852,658 $9,574,902 $9,276,232 $10,779,123 
(52) Stormwater $300,000 $10,427,942 $300,000 $300,000 
(53) Pier $100,601 $8,587,442 $603,662 $110,390 
(54) Resource Recovery & Recycling $5,545,697 $5,554,653 $5,667,130 $5,826,150 
(57) Airport $8,821,612 $9,365,693 $1,966,942 $2,801,356 
(59) Cemetery $339,307 $341,221 $92,273 $93,370 
(60) Big Blue Bus $1,554,939 $9,098,643 $9,151,345 $9,155,641 
(70) Vehicle Replacement $10,702,415 $8,243,443 $9,896,407 $9,345,568 
(71) Computer Equipment Replacement $3,203,387 $3,680,116 $3,906,464 $4,149,445 
(75) Risk Management Admin $36,205 $41,674 $43,756 $45,982 
Total CIP Budget All Funds  108,496,300  134,628,553  103,116,438  93,858,214 
Less Internal Service Transfers ($15,366,590) ($16,024,392) ($16,631,392) ($17,046,535)
Net Total CIP Budget All Funds  $93,129,710  $118,604,161  $86,485,046  $76,811,679 


===== PAGE 279 =====

264
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
NON-GENERAL FUND BUDGET CHANGES 
The total net change proposed for Non-General Fund budgets is a net decrease of approximately $8.8 million. 
These budget decreases are outlined below in the CiP Budget Matrix. All of the proposed budget changes can be 
fully supported by an existing enterprise fund balance, grants, alternative funding, or special revenue sources.  
The FY 2025-26 CiP budget changes include $1.5 million in net increased budget from Clean Beaches funding 
sources for Pico-Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects, $7.5 million in net decreased budget from 
miscellaneous grant funding sources for Pier Bridge Replacement, Broadway Bikeway: 5th Street – 26th Street, 
and Wilshire Safety Project, $450K net increased budget from Gas Tax funding sources for annual paving, $1.3M 
net increased budget from Local Return funding sources for Pier Bridge Replacement, $5.2M net decreased budget 
from Water funding sources primarily due to timing and pushing CiPs to outyears and $4M increased budget 
from Wastewater funding sources for increased Water Main Replacement and Moss Adams Pump Station (MAPS) 
improvements, $4M net decreased budget from Stormwater Fund for Pico-Kenter Outfall, and fleet related $690K 
net increased budget changes for a new vehicle for the Airport and for EPA grant funded RRR sweepers. These 
major budget increases as well as smaller changes are outlined in the CiP Budget Matrix
IMPACTS ON ONGOING OPERATION
 
The CiP Exception-Based changes for  FY 2025-26 do add additional ongoing operational costs of $10,541 for fuel 
and vehicle management fund for one new vehicle.
UNFUNDED CIP PROJECTS
 
Projects that were eliminated or reduced to help close the City’s funding gap resulting from the pandemic or did 
not receive funding due to extremely limited resources are listed in the Unfunded Projects table and are tracked 
for consideration in future funding cycles. in many cases, these are still high priority projects, but they remain 
unfunded given the limited resources. At this time, a total of $456.6 million in projects remain unfunded, including 
Airport Park Expansion, a complete remodel of Parking Structure 1 and other parking structure upgrades, the 
Memorial Park Expansion project, City Hall North building system upgrades, Pier deck and West End Substructure 
upgrades, Fire station facilities, Facilities Renewal Program improvements, and City Yards Modernization – 
Michigan Avenue improvements. 
PROJECT DETAILS
 
This section outlines proposed project budget increases described in the revised budget summary and CiP Budget 
Matrix. Budget increases include additional budget appropriations to projects that have revised estimates, as well 
as new projects that have urgent budget needs or reflect a priority that cannot be deferred until the next biennial 
CiP budget process. The following projects are organized by department and then by title. 


===== PAGE 280 =====

265
Project #
C0460
Target Completion Date
Ongoing
Total Project Budget
Ongoing
Project Description
The Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 
provides ongoing upgrades and repair to streets, 
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, curb ramps, bus pads, 
traffic striping, and other related surface features 
in the public right of way. Roadway striping, including but not limited to, crosswalks, bike lanes and markings, 
longitudinal striping, and STOP markings are also upgraded under this project. An additional $447,236 is 
anticipated in Gas Tax funding from the Senant Bill 1 (SB1) Road Maintenance Rehabilitation Program in FY 
2025-26.
Project Justification
Ongoing street and sidewalk maintenance promotes health and safety by removing pedestrian tripping hazards, 
constructing accessible facilities such as curb ramps, reducing traffic congestion and accidents by providing 
adequately paved and striped streets, and promoting alternative transportation options such as walking and 
bicycles rather than cars.
Public Works 
ANNUAL PAVING AND SIDEWALK REPAIR PROGRAM
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Gas Tax Fund C2604600.689610.98931 $2,447,236
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $2,447,236
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET


===== PAGE 281 =====

266
Project #
C0763
Target Completion Date
FY 2027-28
Total Project Budget
$700,000
Project Description
This project includes the completion of a US 
Geological Survey (USGS) Numerical Flow Model 
which is required for the City to obtain a recharge 
permit that would allow future injection of treated 
recycled water from the Sustainable Water infrastructure Project (SWiP) into local aquifers for reuse.  USGS has 
completed a detailed groundwater flow model for most of the LA Basin. Staff has met with the USGS to begin 
the process of working cooperatively to extend the USGS model into the Santa Monica Basin by sharing our 
existing modeling with the agency. This project received a previous allocation of $300,000 in FY 2017-18. 
Project Justification
This project would utilize a modeling expert to interface with the USGS modeling team. Work would initially 
focus on the Charnock and Olympic sub-basins. The objective of the modeling program is to have a preliminary 
calibrated model for the sub-basins the City currently pumps by 2020.
Public Works 
CITY/USGS NUMERICAL FLOW MODEL
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Water Fund C5007630.689000 $400,000
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $400,000
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET


===== PAGE 282 =====

267
Project #
C0487
Target Completion Date
Ongoing 
Total Project Budget
Ongoing 
Project Description
This project expands the non-potable water system 
to increase recycled water use in the City from 
advanced treated recycled water produced by the 
Sustainable Water infrastructure Project and Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility. This budget will allow 
approximately 1,000 LF per year of recycled water mains in the City to increase recycled water use and decrease 
potable water demand. The funding increase of $193,702 in FY 2025-26 is due to changes in project timing and a 
reallocation of funding in outyears.
Project Justification
The City desires to expand its use of recycled water as a measure to replace potable water and the City’s reliance 
on imported water supplies. This project achieves this by expanding the nonpotable water system systematically to 
nearby parks, new developments, and other approved recycled water uses to replace potable water.
Public Works 
NON-POTABLE WATER MAIN EXPANSION
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Water Fund C5004870.689000 $1,500,000
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $1,500,000
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET


===== PAGE 283 =====

268
Project #
C0907
Target Completion Date
Ongoing
Total Project Budget
Ongoing
Project Description
This project will fund annual operating costs 
associated with the Olympic Advanced Water 
Treatment Facility (AWTF), including energy, 
chemical, and treatment equipment replacement 
costs. The funding increase of $17,993 in FY 2025-26 is due to changes in project timing and a reallocation of 
funding in outyears.
Project Justification
The construction of a new Olympic Advanced Water Treatment Facility (AWTF) to remove industrial contaminants 
from the Olympic Well Field to restore full local groundwater production has been completed. The annual 
operation and restoration of the Olympic Well Field is a regulatory requirement from a Clean-Up and Abatement 
Order due to the settlement received by the City from the responsible parties (Gillette-Boeing). The funding 
proposal will be funded through the Gilette-Boeing Settlement (GBS) funds.is needed. The selected consultant 
will analyze the current parking operations and management practices within the Downtown area, during both 
peak and non-peak conditions and make planning, financial, and operational recommendations for the project 
area.
Public Works 
OLYMPIC AWTF REMEDIATION - GILLETTE/BOEING
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Water Fund C5009070.689410 $917,633
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $917,633
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET


===== PAGE 284 =====

269
Project #
C0588
Target Completion Date
Ongoing
Total Project Budget
Ongoing
Project Description
This project will fund services related to the 
monitoring, reporting, and remediation of 
groundwater contamination per the City’s Olympic 
Well Field Groundwater Management Plan. 
Components of the project include groundwater sampling, laboratory analysis, data analysis, groundwater 
model updates, and regulatory reporting to meet regulatory requirements set forth by the Regional Water 
Quality Control Board. The funding increase of $35,024 in FY 2025-26 is due to changes in project timing and a 
reallocation of funding in outyears.
Project Justification
The City of Santa Monica has supplied safe and reliable water service to its residents and businesses for 
more than 100 years. To ensure the continued safety, reliability and affordability of that service, the City’s 
Sustainable Water Master Plan (SWMP) was updated with the goal of achieving water self-sufficiency. This 
project decreases the City’s reliance on imported water, leading to long-term cost benefits for ratepayers, 
establishment of a diverse and droughtresilient local water supply, and a reduction in the City’s water supply 
energy footprint. in addition, the monitoring, reporting, and remediation of groundwater contamination in 
the City’s Olympic Well Field is required under an Order from the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control 
Board.
Public Works 
OLYMPIC WELL FIELD MANAGEMENT
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Water Fund C5005880.689410 $700,000
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $700,000
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET


===== PAGE 285 =====

270
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
Project #
C0462
Target Completion Date
Ongoing
Total Project Budget
Ongoing
Project Description
This project replaces standard concrete with 
permeable concrete for alleys in need of repair. The 
funding increase of $300,000 in FY 2025-26 is due 
to changes in project timing.
Project Justification
Runoff from the alleys makes its way into the city streets and subsequently into the storm drain infrastructure 
which discharges into the Santa Monica Bay.  Allowing alley runoff to infiltrate into the soil helps reduce the 
volume of polluted urban runoff discharged into our receiving waters and helps meet the requirements of the 
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) discharge permit for the LA County area.
Public Works
PERMEABLE SURFACE ALLEYS
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Stormwater Fund C5204620.689000 $300,000
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $300,000


===== PAGE 286 =====

271
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
Project #
C0488
Target Completion Date
Ongoing
Total Project Budget
Ongoing
Project Description
The Moss Avenue Pump Station (MAPS) is a 
wastewater pump station owned and operated by 
the City of Santa Monica. With a design capacity 
of 26 million gallons per day (MGD), MAPS is a 
critical component of the Coastal interceptor Sewer (CiS), which moves wastewater along the coast from 
northern Los Angeles through Santa Monica and eventually to the Hyperion Treatment Plant in El Segundo for 
treatment and disposal. MAPS has been in operation since 2001 and requires improvements including pumps 
and electrical equipment. The funding increase of $1,000,000 in FY 2025-26 is due to changes in project timing 
and a reallocation of funding in outyears.
Project Justification
The Moss Avenue Pump Station (MAPS) is in need of upgrades to maintain reliable wastewater collection 
services in the City. in 2023, the MAPS experienced two significant failures. improvements are needed to 
replace aging equipment and to prevent future sewer overflow events from occurring.
Public Works
MOSS AVENUE PUMP STATION IMPROVEMENTS
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Wastewater Fund C5104880.689000 $3,960,000
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $3,960,000


===== PAGE 287 =====

272
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
Project #
C0912
Target Completion Date
FY 2026-27
Total Project Budget
$250,000
Project Description
The Moss Avenue Pump Station (MAPS) is a critical 
component of the Coastal interceptor Sewer (CiS), 
which moves wastewater along the coast from 
northern Los Angeles, through Santa Monica, and 
eventually to the Hyperion Wastewater Treatment Plant. MAPS has been in operation since 2001. Much of the 
equipment, including the pumps, is original. As a result, the pumps have experienced on-going maintenance 
issues over the past several years. This project would provide new pumps at the facility.
Project Justification
The Moss Avenue Pump Station (MAPS) is in need of upgrades to maintain reliable wastewater collection services 
in the City.  in 2023, the MAPS experienced two significant failures. in March 2023, the MAPS experienced a 
sewer overflow event due to a series of electrical and communications failures. in May 2023, water intrusion into 
the electrical room caused the main switchboard to cease functioning and the emergency generator to power the 
pumps, nearly causing a second overflow event. improvements are needed to replace ageing equipment and to 
prevent future sewer overflow events from occurring.
Public Works
MOSS AVENUE PUMP STATION PUMP REPLACEMENT
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Wastewater Fund C5109120.689000 $250,000
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $250,000


===== PAGE 288 =====

273
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
Project #
C0862
Target Completion Date
FY 2025-26
Total Project Budget
$2,306,000
Project Description
The Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility 
(SMURRF) provides treatment for urban runoff 
and stormwater to produce non-potable water for 
irrigation and other approved non-potable uses. 
To maintain the operation and production efficiency, periodic replacement/upgrades of mechanical equipment, 
including process piping, metering equipment, and chemical equipment at SMURRF is required. The project 
funds the replacement of aging equipment and modernize the facility to maintain efficient operations. This 
project received a previous allocation of $250,000 in FY 2022-23 and $800,000 in FY 2024-25. The funding 
increase of $300,000 in FY 2025-26 is due to changes in project timing and a reallocation of funding in 
outyears.
Project Justification
The SMURRF treats urban runoff for recycled water use throughout the city. The SMURRF is over 20 years old 
and needs operational improvements as the facility transitions from a best management practice (BMP) to 
a permitted source of recycled water. Replacing aging equipment will maintain operational efficiency at the 
SMURRF .
Public Works
SANTA MONICA URBAN RUNOFF RECYCLING FACILITY (SMURRF) UPGRADES
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Wastewater Fund C5108620.689000 $1,256,000
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $1,256,000


===== PAGE 289 =====

274
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
Project #
C0486
Target Completion Date
Ongoing
Total Project Budget
Ongoing
Project Description
This project provides yearly repair and replacement 
of miscellaneous sanitary sewer lines throughout 
the city and keeps the city on a recommended 100-
year replacement schedule. The city currently has a 
154-mile sewer system and currently replaces 1.5 miles per year. The funding increase of $2,500,000 in FY 2025-
26 is due to changes in project timing and a reallocation of funding in outyears.
Project Justification
The replacement or rehabilitation of these lines address system deficiencies and focus on sewer pipes that are at 
risk of collapse or prone to more frequent blockages due to pipe defects from aging infrastructure. This annual 
replacement program is necessary to ensure that the system is maintained at a high level of service for the 
community.
Public Works
WASTEWATER MAIN REPLACEMENT
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Wastewater Fund C5104860.689000 $6,082,157
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $6,082,157


===== PAGE 290 =====

275
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
Project #
C0001
Target Completion Date
Ongoing
Total Project Budget
Ongoing
Project Description
This project funds the reconstruction of the 
The Fleet vehicle Replacement Program funds 
the ongoing replacement of City fleet vehicles 
according to an established vehicle replacement 
schedule. The program is funded through internal service contributions from other funds that use City fleet 
vehicles. Depreciation is charged on each vehicle every year so that the Fund has sufficient balance to purchase 
a new vehicle at the end of the prior vehicle’s useful life. The funding increase of $141,727 in FY 2025-26 is 
due to the enhancement purchase of a sweeper for the Airport.
Project Justification
These funds are essential for maintaining a safe and functional City fleet of vehicles. Fleet vehicles allow 
all staff to effectively complete daily operations and support all City strategic goals. The Program supports 
revenue generating enterprise Funds such as the Resource Recovery and Recycling, Water, Wastewater, and 
Airport Funds.
Public Works
VEHICLE REPLACEMENT PROGRAM
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Vehicle Management Fund C7000010.689000 $10,654,337
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $10,654,337


===== PAGE 291 =====

276
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - PROPOSED ADDENDUM TO FY 2024-26 CiP BUDGET
Annual internal service contributions from the Resource, Recovery, and Recycling Fund and the Airport Fund to the 
vehicle Replacement Fund to account for enhancement vehicle purchase of three Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA)-grant funded sweepers for Resource, Recovery, and Recycling at an increase of $371,242 in FY 2025-26 and 
one new sweeper for the Airport at an increase of $175,393 in FY 2025-26.
Fund Account FY 2025-26
Resource, Recovery, and 
Recycling Fund I5400010.689000 $4,468,393
Airport Fund I5700010.689000 $274,193
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET $4,742,586


===== PAGE 292 =====

277
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 PROPOSED BUDGET BY FUND
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
C0828 C0108280.689000 Airport Conversion Planning 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 3,000,000
C0461 C0104610.689000 Alley Renewal Program 0 500,000 500,000 500,000
C0460 C0104600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000
C0896 C0108960.689000
Business License Tax, Miscellaneous Taxes and Permitting 
Software 150,000 0 150,000
C0830 C0108300.689000 CCTV Security Camera Program 250,000 0 250,000 300,000 350,000 350,000
C0458 C0104580.689000 Citywide Facilities Renewal Program 2,000,000 0 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000
C0889 C0108890.689000 Community Events Permitting Portal 100,000 0 100,000
C0804 C0108040.689000 Construction Management Software 50,000 0 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000
C0913 C0109130.689000 Copper Wire Protection Program 500,000 0 500,000 1,000,000 1,200,000 800,000
C0890 C0108900.689000 Cybersecurity and Resilience 526,710 0 526,710 800,045 840,051 882,053
C0891 C0108910.689000 Facilities Maintenance Management System Replacement 100,000 0 100,000
C0456 C0104560.689000 Fire Apparatus Replacement 0 900,000 4,000,000
C0892 C0108920.689000 Fleet Building Tenant Improvement 92,064 0 92,064
C0489 C0104890.689000 Maintenance for Parking Structures and Lots 350,000 0 350,000 450,000 450,000 450,000
C0893 C0108930.689000 Monuments and Markers maintenance 50,000 0 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000
C0707 C0107070.689000 Palisades Park Road and Drainage Improvements 122,000 0 122,000
C0895 C0108950.689000 Permitting System 400,000 0 400,000
C0914 C0109140.689000 Quick Build Enhancements at Unsignalized Intersections 100,000 0 100,000
C0894 C0108940.689000 Seismic Analysis of City Buildings 169,000 0 169,000
BP Budget Plan SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements 0 1,550,000 250,000
BP Budget Plan SM28/ CELEBRATE28 0 2,600,000
C0467 C0104670.689000 Swim Facilities Planned Maintenance 100,000 0 100,000
C0837 C0108370.689000 Traffic Signal Maintenance 300,000 0 300,000 300,000 300,000 300,000
C0465 C0104650.689000 Urban Forest and Planting Renewal 250,000 0 250,000 553,963 700,000 600,000
I0003 I0100030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 2,181,382 0 2,181,382 2,586,819 2,766,902 2,961,064
I0002 I0100020.689000 Telecommunications Services 502,856 0 502,856 517,907 533,408 549,374
I0001 I0100010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 5,616,817 0 5,616,817 5,841,818 6,124,414 6,272,185
$15,160,829 $0 $15,160,829 $19,500,552 $19,614,775 $19,764,676 
Funds Available for General Fund CIP Projects
General Fund CIP Allotment 21,000,000 21,000,000 21,000,000 21,000,000 21,000,000
General Fund CIP Allotment Reduction/Projects moved to Held 
List -4,025,722 -4,025,722
Revised General Fund CIP Allotment 16,974,278 16,974,278 21,000,000 21,000,000 21,000,000
Adjustment to Allotment (Prior Year CIP Savings/GF CIP 
Savings) 100,000 100,000
CIP Allocation to fund 4 PD Officers -750,000 -750,000 -500,000 -500,000 -500,000
City Hall East Debt Service Contribution -1,163,449 -1,163,449 -999,448 -822,310 -636,596
Total Funds Available for General Fund CIPs $15,160,829 $0 $15,160,829 $19,500,552 $19,677,690 $19,863,404 
Remaining Balance   $-  $-  $- $62,915 $98,728 
General Fund (01)
FY 2025-26 CIP Addendum
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN


===== PAGE 293 =====

278
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 PROPOSED BUDGET BY FUND
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
BP Budget  Plan Clover Park Playground Reconstruction - PIF 400,000 1,200,000
C0881 C1008810.689000 Park Improvement Program -PIF 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0898 C1008980.689000 Virginia Avenue Park Playground Replacement 800,000 0 800,000
$1,050,000 $0 $1,050,000 $650,000 $1,450,000 $250,000 
C0841 C1108410.689000 ACBH Facilities Maintenance 44,107 0 44,107 200,000 200,000 200,000
C0890 C1108900.689000 Cybersecurity 8,028 0 8,028 12,194 12,803 13,443
C0892 C1108920.689000 Fleet Building Tenant Improvement 1,875 0 1,875
BP Budget  Plan Rebuilding of Beach Lot 4S Decorative Plaza 0 200,000
BP Budget  Plan Surface Lot Paving Program 0 1,100,000 1,100,000 1,100,000
C0467 C1104670.689000 Swim Facilities Planned Maintenance 65,000 0 65,000 65,000 65,000 65,000
I0003 I1100030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 33,647 0 33,647 39,178 42,189 45,455
I0002 I1100020.689000 Telecommunications Services 9,863 0 9,863 10,159 10,463 10,776
I0001 I1100010.689000
Vehicle Replacement Program *(includes $127,500 for Y1-Y4 for 
Beach Maint Side Loader) 634,500 0 634,500 657,700 675,988 559,863
$797,020 $0 $797,020 $2,284,231 $2,106,443 $1,994,537 
C0890 C1208900.689000 Cybersecurity 7,664 0 7,664 11,642 12,224 12,835
I0003 I1200030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 31,510 0 31,510 37,634 40,065 42,671
I0002 I1200020.689000 Telecommunications Services 5,915 0 5,915 6,092 6,274 6,462
$45,089 $0 $45,089 $55,368 $58,563 $61,968 
C0462 C1604620.689000 Permeable Surface Alleys 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000
C0895 C1608950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000
C0845 C1608450.689000 Pico Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,100,000
$100,000 $1,500,000 $1,600,000 $1,150,000 $50,000 $50,000 
C0691 C1806910.689000 Reduced Emission Vehicles 120,000 0 120,000
$120,000 $0 $120,000 0 0 0
C0882 C1908820.689000 19th Street Open Space Project - Phase 2 Development 350,000 0 350,000
C0898 C1908980.689000 Virginia Avenue Park Playground Replacement 600,000 0 600,000
$950,000 $0 $950,000 0 0 0
BP Budget  Plan Clover Park Playground Reconstruction - PIF 1,000,000
C0529 C2005290.689000 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-TEA 21 1,301,000
C0527 C2005270.689000 Pier Bridge Replacement Project (Highway Bridge Program) 23,000,000 -10,139,375 12,860,625 12,860,625
C0814 C2008140.689290 Broadway  Bikeway: 5th Street - 26th Street 600,000 600,000
C0818 C2008180.689290 Wilshire  Safety Project 1,966,589 1,966,589
$23,000,000 ($7,572,786) $15,427,214 $14,161,625 $1,000,000 $0 
CDBG (19)
Miscellaneous Grants (20)
Gas Tax (26)
Special Revenue (10)
Beach Recreation (11)
Housing Authority (12)
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax -Measure V (16)
SC AQMD (18)


===== PAGE 294 =====

279
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 PROPOSED BUDGET BY FUND
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0460 C2604600.689610.98931 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 2,000,000 447,236 2,447,236 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000
$2,000,000 $447,236 $2,447,236 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 
C0460 C2704600.689110 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure M 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0460 C2704600.689120 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure R 1,500,000 0 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0460 C2704600.689130 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Prop C 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0903 C2709030.689110
Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Measure 
M 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0903 C2709030.689130 Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Prop C 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0529 C2705290.689110 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-Measure M 0 325,000
C0768 C2707680.689130 Pavement Management System-Prop C 160,000 0 160,000
C0527 C2705270.689110 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure M 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689120 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure R 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689130 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Prop C 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
$6,960,000 $1,348,749 $8,308,749 $4,125,000 $3,800,000 $3,800,000 
C0460 C5004600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0694 C5006940.689000 Arcadia Water Plant Membrane 0 1500000
C0904 C5009040.689000
Arcadia Water Treatment Plant Operations Building 
Replacement 1,000,000 -200,000 800,000 9,000,000 9,000,000
C0763 C5007630.689000 CITY/USGS Numerical Flow Model 400,000 400,000 1,200,000 800,000
C0804 C5008040.689000 Construction Management Software 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
C0890 C5008900.689000 Cybersecurity 16,423 16,423 24,946 26,193 27,503
C0892 C5008920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 6,375 6,375
C0805 C5008050.690000 Green Sand Media Replacement 0 500000
C0857 C5008570.689000 Groundwater Recharge Well SM 12i 2,200,000 -2,200,000 3,000,000 2600000
C0858 C5008580.689000 Groundwater Sustainability Plan Implementation 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0905 C5009050.689000 Groundwater Well Improvements 700,000 700,000 1,000,000 3,500,000
C0487 C5004870.689000 Non-Potable Water Main Expansion 1,306,298 193,702 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0907 C5009070.689410 Olympic AWTF Remediation - Gillette/Boeing 899,640 17,993 917,633 917,663 935,985 945,705
C0588 C5005880.689410 Olympic Wellfield Management 664,976 35,024 700,000 700,000 700,000 700,000
C0895 C5008950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000      
C0908 C5009080.689000 Salt Nutrient Management Plan 100,000 -50,000 50,000
C0762 C5007620.689000 Reservoir Improvements 4,000,000 -2,000,000 2,000,000 5,600,000 1,000,000
C0860 C5008600.689000 Water & Wastewater Master Plan 0 1,000,000
C0485 C5004850.689000 Water Main Improvements - City Forces 307,468 15,373 322,841 338,983 355,933 373,729
C0484 C5004840.689000 Water Main Replacement 9,000,000 -1,500,000 7,500,000 8,800,000 9,000,000 9,550,000
I0003 I5000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 68,169 68,169 80,474 86,169 92,316
I0002 I5000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 59,501 59,501 61,282 63,116 65,005
I0001 I5000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 632,400 632,400 652,700 655,050 665,750
$21,421,250 ($5,287,908) $16,133,342 $25,786,048 $32,132,446 $23,330,008 
C0460 C5104600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
Local Return (27)
Water (50)
Wastewater (51)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0460 C2604600.689610.98931 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 2,000,000 447,236 2,447,236 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000
$2,000,000 $447,236 $2,447,236 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 
C0460 C2704600.689110 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure M 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0460 C2704600.689120 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure R 1,500,000 0 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0460 C2704600.689130 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Prop C 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0903 C2709030.689110
Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Measure 
M 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0903 C2709030.689130 Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Prop C 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0529 C2705290.689110 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-Measure M 0 325,000
C0768 C2707680.689130 Pavement Management System-Prop C 160,000 0 160,000
C0527 C2705270.689110 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure M 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689120 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure R 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689130 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Prop C 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
$6,960,000 $1,348,749 $8,308,749 $4,125,000 $3,800,000 $3,800,000 
C0460 C5004600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0694 C5006940.689000 Arcadia Water Plant Membrane 0 1500000
C0904 C5009040.689000
Arcadia Water Treatment Plant Operations Building 
Replacement 1,000,000 -200,000 800,000 9,000,000 9,000,000
C0763 C5007630.689000 CITY/USGS Numerical Flow Model 400,000 400,000 1,200,000 800,000
C0804 C5008040.689000 Construction Management Software 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
C0890 C5008900.689000 Cybersecurity 16,423 16,423 24,946 26,193 27,503
C0892 C5008920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 6,375 6,375
C0805 C5008050.690000 Green Sand Media Replacement 0 500000
C0857 C5008570.689000 Groundwater Recharge Well SM 12i 2,200,000 -2,200,000 3,000,000 2600000
C0858 C5008580.689000 Groundwater Sustainability Plan Implementation 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0905 C5009050.689000 Groundwater Well Improvements 700,000 700,000 1,000,000 3,500,000
C0487 C5004870.689000 Non-Potable Water Main Expansion 1,306,298 193,702 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0907 C5009070.689410 Olympic AWTF Remediation - Gillette/Boeing 899,640 17,993 917,633 917,663 935,985 945,705
C0588 C5005880.689410 Olympic Wellfield Management 664,976 35,024 700,000 700,000 700,000 700,000
C0895 C5008950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000      
C0908 C5009080.689000 Salt Nutrient Management Plan 100,000 -50,000 50,000
C0762 C5007620.689000 Reservoir Improvements 4,000,000 -2,000,000 2,000,000 5,600,000 1,000,000
C0860 C5008600.689000 Water & Wastewater Master Plan 0 1,000,000
C0485 C5004850.689000 Water Main Improvements - City Forces 307,468 15,373 322,841 338,983 355,933 373,729
C0484 C5004840.689000 Water Main Replacement 9,000,000 -1,500,000 7,500,000 8,800,000 9,000,000 9,550,000
I0003 I5000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 68,169 68,169 80,474 86,169 92,316
I0002 I5000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 59,501 59,501 61,282 63,116 65,005
I0001 I5000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 632,400 632,400 652,700 655,050 665,750
$21,421,250 ($5,287,908) $16,133,342 $25,786,048 $32,132,446 $23,330,008 
C0460 C5104600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
Local Return (27)
Water (50)
Wastewater (51)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
BP Budget  Plan Clover Park Playground Reconstruction - PIF 400,000 1,200,000
C0881 C1008810.689000 Park Improvement Program -PIF 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0898 C1008980.689000 Virginia Avenue Park Playground Replacement 800,000 0 800,000
$1,050,000 $0 $1,050,000 $650,000 $1,450,000 $250,000 
C0841 C1108410.689000 ACBH Facilities Maintenance 44,107 0 44,107 200,000 200,000 200,000
C0890 C1108900.689000 Cybersecurity 8,028 0 8,028 12,194 12,803 13,443
C0892 C1108920.689000 Fleet Building Tenant Improvement 1,875 0 1,875
BP Budget  Plan Rebuilding of Beach Lot 4S Decorative Plaza 0 200,000
BP Budget  Plan Surface Lot Paving Program 0 1,100,000 1,100,000 1,100,000
C0467 C1104670.689000 Swim Facilities Planned Maintenance 65,000 0 65,000 65,000 65,000 65,000
I0003 I1100030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 33,647 0 33,647 39,178 42,189 45,455
I0002 I1100020.689000 Telecommunications Services 9,863 0 9,863 10,159 10,463 10,776
I0001 I1100010.689000
Vehicle Replacement Program *(includes $127,500 for Y1-Y4 for 
Beach Maint Side Loader) 634,500 0 634,500 657,700 675,988 559,863
$797,020 $0 $797,020 $2,284,231 $2,106,443 $1,994,537 
C0890 C1208900.689000 Cybersecurity 7,664 0 7,664 11,642 12,224 12,835
I0003 I1200030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 31,510 0 31,510 37,634 40,065 42,671
I0002 I1200020.689000 Telecommunications Services 5,915 0 5,915 6,092 6,274 6,462
$45,089 $0 $45,089 $55,368 $58,563 $61,968 
C0462 C1604620.689000 Permeable Surface Alleys 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000
C0895 C1608950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000
C0845 C1608450.689000 Pico Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,100,000
$100,000 $1,500,000 $1,600,000 $1,150,000 $50,000 $50,000 
C0691 C1806910.689000 Reduced Emission Vehicles 120,000 0 120,000
$120,000 $0 $120,000 0 0 0
C0882 C1908820.689000 19th Street Open Space Project - Phase 2 Development 350,000 0 350,000
C0898 C1908980.689000 Virginia Avenue Park Playground Replacement 600,000 0 600,000
$950,000 $0 $950,000 0 0 0
BP Budget  Plan Clover Park Playground Reconstruction - PIF 1,000,000
C0529 C2005290.689000 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-TEA 21 1,301,000
C0527 C2005270.689000 Pier Bridge Replacement Project (Highway Bridge Program) 23,000,000 -10,139,375 12,860,625 12,860,625
C0814 C2008140.689290 Broadway  Bikeway: 5th Street - 26th Street 600,000 600,000
C0818 C2008180.689290 Wilshire  Safety Project 1,966,589 1,966,589
$23,000,000 ($7,572,786) $15,427,214 $14,161,625 $1,000,000 $0 
CDBG (19)
Miscellaneous Grants (20)
Gas Tax (26)
Special Revenue (10)
Beach Recreation (11)
Housing Authority (12)
Clean Beaches & Ocean Parcel Tax -Measure V (16)
SC AQMD (18)


===== PAGE 295 =====

280
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 PROPOSED BUDGET BY FUND
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0890 C5108900.689000 Cybersecurity 2,957 0 2,957 4,491 4,715 4,951
C0892 C5108920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 4,125 0 4,125
C0457 C5104570.689000 Hyperion Capital Payment 3,582,157 0 3,582,157 3,689,622 3,914,320 3,914,320
C0488 C5104880.689000 Moss Avenue Pump Station (MAPS) Improvements 2,960,000 1,000,000 3,960,000 1,500,000
C0912 C5109120.689000 Moss Ave Pump Station Pump Rep 250,000 250,000
C0895 C5108950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 0 50,000
C0906 C5109060.689000 PLC & Network Upgrades 0
C0862 C5108620.689000
Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility (SMURRF) 
Upgrades 956,000 300,000 1,256,000
BP Budget  Plan SWIP Maintenance 0 500,000 750,000 750,000
C0486 C5104860.689000 Wastewater Main Replacement 3,582,157 2,500,000 6,082,157 4,689,622 3,914,320 3,914,320
I0003 I5100030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 12,359 0 12,359 14,468 15,559 16,741
I0002 I5100020.689000 Telecommunications Services 19,903 0 19,903 20,499 21,113 21,745
I0001 I5100010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 383,000 0 383,000 406,200 406,205 407,046
$11,802,658 $4,050,000 $15,852,658 $9,574,902 $9,276,232 $10,779,123 
C0462 C5204620.689000 Permeable Surface Alleys 300000 300,000 300,000 300,000 300,000
C0845 C5208450.689000 Pico-Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects 4000000 -4,000,000 0
C0845 C5208450.689000.90371
Pico-Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects - (Memorial 
Park) 1,349,820
C0845 C5208450.689530.90371
Pico-Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects - (Memorial 
Park) 8,778,122
$4,300,000 ($4,000,000) $300,000 $10,427,942 $300,000 $300,000 
C0890 C5308900.689000 Cybersecurity 1,802 0 1,802 2,737 2,874 3,018
C0892 C5308920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 938 0 938
C0615 C5306150.689000 Pier Below Deck Fire Sprinkler 0 8,000,000
BP Budget  Plan Pier Gazebo Repair and Replacement 0 485,000
C0674 C5306740.689000 Pier Railing & Light Pole Replacement Program 0 500,000
C0864 C5308640.689000 Pier Trash Compactor Relocation 0
I0003 I5300030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 7,472 0 7,472 8,883 9,514 10,195
I0002 I5300020.689000 Telecommunications Services 14,489 0 14,489 14,922 15,369 15,829
I0001 I5300010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 75,900 0 75,900 75,900 75,905 81,348
$100,601 $0 $100,601 $8,587,442 $603,662 $110,390 
C0890 C5408900.689000 Cybersecurity 10,457 0 10,457 15,883 16,677 17,511
C0892 C5408920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 12,563 0 12,563
C0895 C5408950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 0 50,000
C0454 C5404540.689000 Refuse & Recycling Container Replacement Program 950,000 0 950,000 980,000 1,010,000 1,040,000
I0003 I5400030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 43,945 0 43,945 50,928 54,920 59,256
I0002 I5400020.689000 Telecommunications Services 10,339 0 10,339 10,649 10,967 11,296
I0001 I5400010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 4,097,151 371,242 4,468,393 4,497,193 4,574,566 4,698,087
$5,174,455 $371,242 $5,545,697 $5,554,653 $5,667,130 $5,826,150 
Stormwater (52)
Pier (53)
Resource Recovery & Recycling (54)
Airport (57)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0460 C2604600.689610.98931 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 2,000,000 447,236 2,447,236 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000
$2,000,000 $447,236 $2,447,236 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 
C0460 C2704600.689110 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure M 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0460 C2704600.689120 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure R 1,500,000 0 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0460 C2704600.689130 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Prop C 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0903 C2709030.689110
Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Measure 
M 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0903 C2709030.689130 Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Prop C 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0529 C2705290.689110 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-Measure M 0 325,000
C0768 C2707680.689130 Pavement Management System-Prop C 160,000 0 160,000
C0527 C2705270.689110 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure M 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689120 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure R 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689130 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Prop C 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
$6,960,000 $1,348,749 $8,308,749 $4,125,000 $3,800,000 $3,800,000 
C0460 C5004600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0694 C5006940.689000 Arcadia Water Plant Membrane 0 1500000
C0904 C5009040.689000
Arcadia Water Treatment Plant Operations Building 
Replacement 1,000,000 -200,000 800,000 9,000,000 9,000,000
C0763 C5007630.689000 CITY/USGS Numerical Flow Model 400,000 400,000 1,200,000 800,000
C0804 C5008040.689000 Construction Management Software 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
C0890 C5008900.689000 Cybersecurity 16,423 16,423 24,946 26,193 27,503
C0892 C5008920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 6,375 6,375
C0805 C5008050.690000 Green Sand Media Replacement 0 500000
C0857 C5008570.689000 Groundwater Recharge Well SM 12i 2,200,000 -2,200,000 3,000,000 2600000
C0858 C5008580.689000 Groundwater Sustainability Plan Implementation 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0905 C5009050.689000 Groundwater Well Improvements 700,000 700,000 1,000,000 3,500,000
C0487 C5004870.689000 Non-Potable Water Main Expansion 1,306,298 193,702 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0907 C5009070.689410 Olympic AWTF Remediation - Gillette/Boeing 899,640 17,993 917,633 917,663 935,985 945,705
C0588 C5005880.689410 Olympic Wellfield Management 664,976 35,024 700,000 700,000 700,000 700,000
C0895 C5008950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000      
C0908 C5009080.689000 Salt Nutrient Management Plan 100,000 -50,000 50,000
C0762 C5007620.689000 Reservoir Improvements 4,000,000 -2,000,000 2,000,000 5,600,000 1,000,000
C0860 C5008600.689000 Water & Wastewater Master Plan 0 1,000,000
C0485 C5004850.689000 Water Main Improvements - City Forces 307,468 15,373 322,841 338,983 355,933 373,729
C0484 C5004840.689000 Water Main Replacement 9,000,000 -1,500,000 7,500,000 8,800,000 9,000,000 9,550,000
I0003 I5000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 68,169 68,169 80,474 86,169 92,316
I0002 I5000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 59,501 59,501 61,282 63,116 65,005
I0001 I5000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 632,400 632,400 652,700 655,050 665,750
$21,421,250 ($5,287,908) $16,133,342 $25,786,048 $32,132,446 $23,330,008 
C0460 C5104600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
Local Return (27)
Water (50)
Wastewater (51)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0460 C2604600.689610.98931 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 2,000,000 447,236 2,447,236 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000
$2,000,000 $447,236 $2,447,236 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 
C0460 C2704600.689110 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure M 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0460 C2704600.689120 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure R 1,500,000 0 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0460 C2704600.689130 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Prop C 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0903 C2709030.689110
Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Measure 
M 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0903 C2709030.689130 Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Prop C 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0529 C2705290.689110 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-Measure M 0 325,000
C0768 C2707680.689130 Pavement Management System-Prop C 160,000 0 160,000
C0527 C2705270.689110 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure M 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689120 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure R 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689130 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Prop C 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
$6,960,000 $1,348,749 $8,308,749 $4,125,000 $3,800,000 $3,800,000 
C0460 C5004600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0694 C5006940.689000 Arcadia Water Plant Membrane 0 1500000
C0904 C5009040.689000
Arcadia Water Treatment Plant Operations Building 
Replacement 1,000,000 -200,000 800,000 9,000,000 9,000,000
C0763 C5007630.689000 CITY/USGS Numerical Flow Model 400,000 400,000 1,200,000 800,000
C0804 C5008040.689000 Construction Management Software 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
C0890 C5008900.689000 Cybersecurity 16,423 16,423 24,946 26,193 27,503
C0892 C5008920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 6,375 6,375
C0805 C5008050.690000 Green Sand Media Replacement 0 500000
C0857 C5008570.689000 Groundwater Recharge Well SM 12i 2,200,000 -2,200,000 3,000,000 2600000
C0858 C5008580.689000 Groundwater Sustainability Plan Implementation 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0905 C5009050.689000 Groundwater Well Improvements 700,000 700,000 1,000,000 3,500,000
C0487 C5004870.689000 Non-Potable Water Main Expansion 1,306,298 193,702 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0907 C5009070.689410 Olympic AWTF Remediation - Gillette/Boeing 899,640 17,993 917,633 917,663 935,985 945,705
C0588 C5005880.689410 Olympic Wellfield Management 664,976 35,024 700,000 700,000 700,000 700,000
C0895 C5008950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000      
C0908 C5009080.689000 Salt Nutrient Management Plan 100,000 -50,000 50,000
C0762 C5007620.689000 Reservoir Improvements 4,000,000 -2,000,000 2,000,000 5,600,000 1,000,000
C0860 C5008600.689000 Water & Wastewater Master Plan 0 1,000,000
C0485 C5004850.689000 Water Main Improvements - City Forces 307,468 15,373 322,841 338,983 355,933 373,729
C0484 C5004840.689000 Water Main Replacement 9,000,000 -1,500,000 7,500,000 8,800,000 9,000,000 9,550,000
I0003 I5000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 68,169 68,169 80,474 86,169 92,316
I0002 I5000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 59,501 59,501 61,282 63,116 65,005
I0001 I5000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 632,400 632,400 652,700 655,050 665,750
$21,421,250 ($5,287,908) $16,133,342 $25,786,048 $32,132,446 $23,330,008 
C0460 C5104600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
Local Return (27)
Water (50)
Wastewater (51)


===== PAGE 296 =====

281
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0890 C5108900.689000 Cybersecurity 2,957 0 2,957 4,491 4,715 4,951
C0892 C5108920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 4,125 0 4,125
C0457 C5104570.689000 Hyperion Capital Payment 3,582,157 0 3,582,157 3,689,622 3,914,320 3,914,320
C0488 C5104880.689000 Moss Avenue Pump Station (MAPS) Improvements 2,960,000 1,000,000 3,960,000 1,500,000
C0912 C5109120.689000 Moss Ave Pump Station Pump Rep 250,000 250,000
C0895 C5108950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 0 50,000
C0906 C5109060.689000 PLC & Network Upgrades 0
C0862 C5108620.689000
Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility (SMURRF) 
Upgrades 956,000 300,000 1,256,000
BP Budget  Plan SWIP Maintenance 0 500,000 750,000 750,000
C0486 C5104860.689000 Wastewater Main Replacement 3,582,157 2,500,000 6,082,157 4,689,622 3,914,320 3,914,320
I0003 I5100030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 12,359 0 12,359 14,468 15,559 16,741
I0002 I5100020.689000 Telecommunications Services 19,903 0 19,903 20,499 21,113 21,745
I0001 I5100010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 383,000 0 383,000 406,200 406,205 407,046
$11,802,658 $4,050,000 $15,852,658 $9,574,902 $9,276,232 $10,779,123 
C0462 C5204620.689000 Permeable Surface Alleys 300000 300,000 300,000 300,000 300,000
C0845 C5208450.689000 Pico-Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects 4000000 -4,000,000 0
C0845 C5208450.689000.90371
Pico-Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects - (Memorial 
Park) 1,349,820
C0845 C5208450.689530.90371
Pico-Kenter Outfall and MS4 Compliance Projects - (Memorial 
Park) 8,778,122
$4,300,000 ($4,000,000) $300,000 $10,427,942 $300,000 $300,000 
C0890 C5308900.689000 Cybersecurity 1,802 0 1,802 2,737 2,874 3,018
C0892 C5308920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 938 0 938
C0615 C5306150.689000 Pier Below Deck Fire Sprinkler 0 8,000,000
BP Budget  Plan Pier Gazebo Repair and Replacement 0 485,000
C0674 C5306740.689000 Pier Railing & Light Pole Replacement Program 0 500,000
C0864 C5308640.689000 Pier Trash Compactor Relocation 0
I0003 I5300030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 7,472 0 7,472 8,883 9,514 10,195
I0002 I5300020.689000 Telecommunications Services 14,489 0 14,489 14,922 15,369 15,829
I0001 I5300010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 75,900 0 75,900 75,900 75,905 81,348
$100,601 $0 $100,601 $8,587,442 $603,662 $110,390 
C0890 C5408900.689000 Cybersecurity 10,457 0 10,457 15,883 16,677 17,511
C0892 C5408920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 12,563 0 12,563
C0895 C5408950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 0 50,000
C0454 C5404540.689000 Refuse & Recycling Container Replacement Program 950,000 0 950,000 980,000 1,010,000 1,040,000
I0003 I5400030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 43,945 0 43,945 50,928 54,920 59,256
I0002 I5400020.689000 Telecommunications Services 10,339 0 10,339 10,649 10,967 11,296
I0001 I5400010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 4,097,151 371,242 4,468,393 4,497,193 4,574,566 4,698,087
$5,174,455 $371,242 $5,545,697 $5,554,653 $5,667,130 $5,826,150 
Stormwater (52)
Pier (53)
Resource Recovery & Recycling (54)
Airport (57)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0471 C5704710.689000 Airfield Pavement Maintenance 600,000 0 600,000
C0469 C5704690.689000 Airport Building / Facilities Refurbishments 6,491,000 0 6,491,000 7,729,024 280,667 280,667
C0468 C5704680.689000 Airport Environmental 0
C0470 C5704700.689000 Airport Parking Lot Maintenance 1,102,000 0 1,102,000 1,440,600 1,487,000 2,318,000
C0544 C5705440.689000 Airport Security Enhancement Project 300,000 0 300,000
C0890 C5708900.689000 Cybersecurity 5,834 0 5,834 8,862 $9,305 9,770
C0892 C5708920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 938 0 938
I0003 I5700030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 24,297 0 24,297 28,393 30,436 32,644
I0002 I5700020.689000 Telecommunications Services 23,350 0 23,350 24,049 24,769 25,510
I0001 I5700010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 98,800 175,393 274,193 134,765 134,765 134,765
$8,646,219 $175,393 $8,821,612 $9,365,693 $1,966,942 $2,801,356 
C0910 C5909100.689000 Cemetery and Mortuary Software
C0890 C5908900.689000 Cybersecurity 2,093 0 2,093 3,179 3,338 3,505
C0892 C5908920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 938 0 938
C0887 C5908871.689000 Mausoleum and Cemetery Maintenance 250,000 0 250,000 250,000
I0003 I5900030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 8,669 0 8,669 10,303 11,025 11,804
I0002 I5900020.689000 Telecommunications Services 4,407 0 4,407 4,539 4,675 4,815
I0001 I5900010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 73,200 0 73,200 73,200 73,235 73,246
$339,307 $0 $339,307 $341,221 $92,273 $93,370 
C0911 C6009110.689000 Automated Bus Lane and Bus Stop 312,187 0 312,187 312,187 312,187 312,187
C0483 C6004830.689000 BBB Facilities Upgrades & Renovations 0 569,737 586,829 633,999
C0477 C6004770.689000 BBB Information Technology Program 0 1,079,349 1,143,233 1,157,464
C0475 C6004750.689000 Bus Components - BBB 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 6,372,133 6,368,451 6,509,481
C0478 C6004780.689000 Bus Stop Amenities 0 79,568 81,955 84,413
C0747 C6007470.689000 Customer Experience Technology Enhancements 0 130,438 103,307
C0890 C6008900.689000 Cybersecurity 49,724 0 49,724 75,528 79,304 83,269
C0868 C6008680.689000 Fleet Asset Management System 0 122,490 128,614 135,045
C0474 C6004740.689000 Radio Tower Equipment 120,000 0 120,000 122,000 110,000
C0482 C6004820.689000 Shop Equipment 0 100,000 100,000 100,000
C0476 C6004760.689000 Yard Improvements 0 60,000 60,000 60,000
I0002 I6000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 73,028 0 73,028 75,213 77,465 79,783
$1,554,939 $0 $1,554,939 $9,098,643 $9,151,345 $9,155,641 
C0890 C7008900.689000 Cybersecurity 6,724 0 6,724 10,213 10,723 11,260
C0001 C7000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 10,512,610 141,727 10,654,337 8,185,870 9,835,740 9,281,610
I0003 I7000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 27,618 0 27,618 33,213 35,373 37,691
I0002 I7000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 13,736 0 13,736 14,147 14,571 15,007
$10,560,688 $141,727 $10,702,415 $8,243,443 $9,896,407 $9,345,568 
C0003 C7100030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 2,456,856 0 2,456,856 2,911,241 3,114,575 3,333,853
C0002 C7100020.689000 Telecommunication Services 746,531 0 746,531 768,875 791,889 815,592
Vehicle Management (70)
Computer Equipment Replacement (71)
Cemetery (59)
Big Blue Bus (60)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0460 C2604600.689610.98931 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 2,000,000 447,236 2,447,236 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000
$2,000,000 $447,236 $2,447,236 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 
C0460 C2704600.689110 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure M 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0460 C2704600.689120 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure R 1,500,000 0 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0460 C2704600.689130 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Prop C 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0903 C2709030.689110
Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Measure 
M 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0903 C2709030.689130 Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Prop C 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0529 C2705290.689110 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-Measure M 0 325,000
C0768 C2707680.689130 Pavement Management System-Prop C 160,000 0 160,000
C0527 C2705270.689110 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure M 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689120 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure R 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689130 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Prop C 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
$6,960,000 $1,348,749 $8,308,749 $4,125,000 $3,800,000 $3,800,000 
C0460 C5004600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0694 C5006940.689000 Arcadia Water Plant Membrane 0 1500000
C0904 C5009040.689000
Arcadia Water Treatment Plant Operations Building 
Replacement 1,000,000 -200,000 800,000 9,000,000 9,000,000
C0763 C5007630.689000 CITY/USGS Numerical Flow Model 400,000 400,000 1,200,000 800,000
C0804 C5008040.689000 Construction Management Software 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
C0890 C5008900.689000 Cybersecurity 16,423 16,423 24,946 26,193 27,503
C0892 C5008920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 6,375 6,375
C0805 C5008050.690000 Green Sand Media Replacement 0 500000
C0857 C5008570.689000 Groundwater Recharge Well SM 12i 2,200,000 -2,200,000 3,000,000 2600000
C0858 C5008580.689000 Groundwater Sustainability Plan Implementation 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0905 C5009050.689000 Groundwater Well Improvements 700,000 700,000 1,000,000 3,500,000
C0487 C5004870.689000 Non-Potable Water Main Expansion 1,306,298 193,702 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0907 C5009070.689410 Olympic AWTF Remediation - Gillette/Boeing 899,640 17,993 917,633 917,663 935,985 945,705
C0588 C5005880.689410 Olympic Wellfield Management 664,976 35,024 700,000 700,000 700,000 700,000
C0895 C5008950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000      
C0908 C5009080.689000 Salt Nutrient Management Plan 100,000 -50,000 50,000
C0762 C5007620.689000 Reservoir Improvements 4,000,000 -2,000,000 2,000,000 5,600,000 1,000,000
C0860 C5008600.689000 Water & Wastewater Master Plan 0 1,000,000
C0485 C5004850.689000 Water Main Improvements - City Forces 307,468 15,373 322,841 338,983 355,933 373,729
C0484 C5004840.689000 Water Main Replacement 9,000,000 -1,500,000 7,500,000 8,800,000 9,000,000 9,550,000
I0003 I5000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 68,169 68,169 80,474 86,169 92,316
I0002 I5000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 59,501 59,501 61,282 63,116 65,005
I0001 I5000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 632,400 632,400 652,700 655,050 665,750
$21,421,250 ($5,287,908) $16,133,342 $25,786,048 $32,132,446 $23,330,008 
C0460 C5104600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
Local Return (27)
Water (50)
Wastewater (51)
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 PROPOSED BUDGET BY FUND


===== PAGE 297 =====

282
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0471 C5704710.689000 Airfield Pavement Maintenance 600,000 0 600,000
C0469 C5704690.689000 Airport Building / Facilities Refurbishments 6,491,000 0 6,491,000 7,729,024 280,667 280,667
C0468 C5704680.689000 Airport Environmental 0
C0470 C5704700.689000 Airport Parking Lot Maintenance 1,102,000 0 1,102,000 1,440,600 1,487,000 2,318,000
C0544 C5705440.689000 Airport Security Enhancement Project 300,000 0 300,000
C0890 C5708900.689000 Cybersecurity 5,834 0 5,834 8,862 $9,305 9,770
C0892 C5708920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 938 0 938
I0003 I5700030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 24,297 0 24,297 28,393 30,436 32,644
I0002 I5700020.689000 Telecommunications Services 23,350 0 23,350 24,049 24,769 25,510
I0001 I5700010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 98,800 175,393 274,193 134,765 134,765 134,765
$8,646,219 $175,393 $8,821,612 $9,365,693 $1,966,942 $2,801,356 
C0910 C5909100.689000 Cemetery and Mortuary Software
C0890 C5908900.689000 Cybersecurity 2,093 0 2,093 3,179 3,338 3,505
C0892 C5908920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 938 0 938
C0887 C5908871.689000 Mausoleum and Cemetery Maintenance 250,000 0 250,000 250,000
I0003 I5900030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 8,669 0 8,669 10,303 11,025 11,804
I0002 I5900020.689000 Telecommunications Services 4,407 0 4,407 4,539 4,675 4,815
I0001 I5900010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 73,200 0 73,200 73,200 73,235 73,246
$339,307 $0 $339,307 $341,221 $92,273 $93,370 
C0911 C6009110.689000 Automated Bus Lane and Bus Stop 312,187 0 312,187 312,187 312,187 312,187
C0483 C6004830.689000 BBB Facilities Upgrades & Renovations 0 569,737 586,829 633,999
C0477 C6004770.689000 BBB Information Technology Program 0 1,079,349 1,143,233 1,157,464
C0475 C6004750.689000 Bus Components - BBB 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 6,372,133 6,368,451 6,509,481
C0478 C6004780.689000 Bus Stop Amenities 0 79,568 81,955 84,413
C0747 C6007470.689000 Customer Experience Technology Enhancements 0 130,438 103,307
C0890 C6008900.689000 Cybersecurity 49,724 0 49,724 75,528 79,304 83,269
C0868 C6008680.689000 Fleet Asset Management System 0 122,490 128,614 135,045
C0474 C6004740.689000 Radio Tower Equipment 120,000 0 120,000 122,000 110,000
C0482 C6004820.689000 Shop Equipment 0 100,000 100,000 100,000
C0476 C6004760.689000 Yard Improvements 0 60,000 60,000 60,000
I0002 I6000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 73,028 0 73,028 75,213 77,465 79,783
$1,554,939 $0 $1,554,939 $9,098,643 $9,151,345 $9,155,641 
C0890 C7008900.689000 Cybersecurity 6,724 0 6,724 10,213 10,723 11,260
C0001 C7000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 10,512,610 141,727 10,654,337 8,185,870 9,835,740 9,281,610
I0003 I7000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 27,618 0 27,618 33,213 35,373 37,691
I0002 I7000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 13,736 0 13,736 14,147 14,571 15,007
$10,560,688 $141,727 $10,702,415 $8,243,443 $9,896,407 $9,345,568 
C0003 C7100030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 2,456,856 0 2,456,856 2,911,241 3,114,575 3,333,853
C0002 C7100020.689000 Telecommunication Services 746,531 0 746,531 768,875 791,889 815,592
Vehicle Management (70)
Computer Equipment Replacement (71)
Cemetery (59)
Big Blue Bus (60)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
$3,203,387 $0 $3,203,387 $3,680,116 $3,906,464 $4,149,445 
C0794 C7407940.689000 Rooftop Fall Protection and Access Retrofits- Phase III 0
0 0 0 0 0
C0890 C7508900.689000 Cybersecurity 4,285 0 4,285 6,509 6,834 7,176
C0892 C7508920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 188 0 188 -  -  - 
I0003 I7500030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 17,788 0 17,788 20,948 22,423 24,016
I0002 I7500020.689000 Telecommunications Services 9,144 0 9,144 9,417 9,699 9,990
I0001 I7500010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 4,800 0 4,800 4,800 4,800 4,800
$36,205 $0 $36,205 $41,674 $43,756 $45,982 
TOTAL CIP BUDGET ALL FUNDS $117,322,647 ($8,826,347) $108,496,300 $134,628,553 $103,116,438 $93,858,214 
Less Internal Service Transfers ($14,819,955) ($546,635) ($15,366,590) ($16,024,392) ($16,631,392) ($17,046,535)
NET GRAND TOTAL CIP BUDGET ALL FUNDS $102,502,692 ($9,372,982) $93,129,710 $118,604,161 $86,485,046 $76,811,679 
0.139735908
Self Insurance (74)
Risk Management (75)
APPROVED BUDGET 
FY2025-26
INCREASE/ 
(DECREASE) FY2025-
26
PROPOSED 
BUGDET FY2025-
26 FY2026-27 FY2027-28 FY2028-29
  
CIP Project 
Number Account Number PROJECT TITLE
BUDGET BUDGET PLAN
C0460 C2604600.689610.98931 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 2,000,000 447,236 2,447,236 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000
$2,000,000 $447,236 $2,447,236 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 
C0460 C2704600.689110 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure M 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0460 C2704600.689120 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Measure R 1,500,000 0 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0460 C2704600.689130 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program-Prop C 1,000,000 0 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
C0903 C2709030.689110
Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Measure 
M 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0903 C2709030.689130 Crosswalk and Bikeway Pavement Markings Refresh-Prop C 150,000 0 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0529 C2705290.689110 Palisades Bluffs Stabilization Phase III-Measure M 0 325,000
C0768 C2707680.689130 Pavement Management System-Prop C 160,000 0 160,000
C0527 C2705270.689110 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure M 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689120 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Measure R 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
C0527 C2705270.689130 Pier Bridge Replacement Project-Prop C 1,000,000 449,583 1,449,583
$6,960,000 $1,348,749 $8,308,749 $4,125,000 $3,800,000 $3,800,000 
C0460 C5004600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
C0694 C5006940.689000 Arcadia Water Plant Membrane 0 1500000
C0904 C5009040.689000
Arcadia Water Treatment Plant Operations Building 
Replacement 1,000,000 -200,000 800,000 9,000,000 9,000,000
C0763 C5007630.689000 CITY/USGS Numerical Flow Model 400,000 400,000 1,200,000 800,000
C0804 C5008040.689000 Construction Management Software 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
C0890 C5008900.689000 Cybersecurity 16,423 16,423 24,946 26,193 27,503
C0892 C5008920.689000 Fleet Tenant Improvements 6,375 6,375
C0805 C5008050.690000 Green Sand Media Replacement 0 500000
C0857 C5008570.689000 Groundwater Recharge Well SM 12i 2,200,000 -2,200,000 3,000,000 2600000
C0858 C5008580.689000 Groundwater Sustainability Plan Implementation 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000 150,000
C0905 C5009050.689000 Groundwater Well Improvements 700,000 700,000 1,000,000 3,500,000
C0487 C5004870.689000 Non-Potable Water Main Expansion 1,306,298 193,702 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000 1,500,000
C0907 C5009070.689410 Olympic AWTF Remediation - Gillette/Boeing 899,640 17,993 917,633 917,663 935,985 945,705
C0588 C5005880.689410 Olympic Wellfield Management 664,976 35,024 700,000 700,000 700,000 700,000
C0895 C5008950.689000 Permitting System 50,000 50,000      
C0908 C5009080.689000 Salt Nutrient Management Plan 100,000 -50,000 50,000
C0762 C5007620.689000 Reservoir Improvements 4,000,000 -2,000,000 2,000,000 5,600,000 1,000,000
C0860 C5008600.689000 Water & Wastewater Master Plan 0 1,000,000
C0485 C5004850.689000 Water Main Improvements - City Forces 307,468 15,373 322,841 338,983 355,933 373,729
C0484 C5004840.689000 Water Main Replacement 9,000,000 -1,500,000 7,500,000 8,800,000 9,000,000 9,550,000
I0003 I5000030.689000 Computer Equipment Replacement Program 68,169 68,169 80,474 86,169 92,316
I0002 I5000020.689000 Telecommunications Services 59,501 59,501 61,282 63,116 65,005
I0001 I5000010.689000 Vehicle Replacement Program 632,400 632,400 652,700 655,050 665,750
$21,421,250 ($5,287,908) $16,133,342 $25,786,048 $32,132,446 $23,330,008 
C0460 C5104600.689000 Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program 250,000 0 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
Local Return (27)
Water (50)
Wastewater (51)
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 PROPOSED BUDGET BY FUND


===== PAGE 298 =====

283
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 UNFUNDED PROJECTSProposed FY 2025-26 Budget
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Infrastructure Maintenance
Alley Renewal Program $500,000 
Computer Replacement Contributions - General Fund Deferral $3,570,000 
Main Library Security Camera Replacement $107,100 
Parking Facilities Renewal Program $2,310,000 
Parking Structure #1 Complete Remodel $14,038,605 
Promenade Kiosk $504,000 
Public Safety Facility Security and Tenant Improvements $231,000 
Replacement Program For Parking Access & Revenue Control Systems and Equipment $27,954,465 
Safety Upgrades for Santa Monica Public Library $924,000 
Surface Parking Lot Repaving Program (General Fund and Beach Fund) $11,550,000 
Vehicle Replacement Contributions - General Fund Deferral $8,463,000 
City Yards Modernization - Michigan Ave Improvements $16,000,000 
Camera Obscura/Art Lab Facility Maintenance $1,052,876 
Downtown Parking Structures Guardrail and Waterproofing Upgrades $8,100,000 
Property Room Solutions, Improvements, and Updates $1,028,000 
Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program $350,000 
Main Library Central Courtyard Revitalization $283,000 
Urban Forest and Planting  Renewal $300,000 
Civic Structure Decorative Feature Repair $710,000 
Civic Structure Elevator Replacement $3,100,000 
Farmers Market Vehicle Barrier $1,317,056 
Historic City Hall North Wing Building System Upgrades $11,589,000 
Main Library Landscaping - Soil Compaction $130,000 
Rebuilding of Beach Lot 4S Decorative Plaza $283,000 
Santa Monica Swim Center spare boiler $76,000 
Swim Center Engineering of air flow and water HVAC lines $2,280,000 
Facility Renewal Program $20,695,165 
Unfunded Projects
Projects will be considered in future funding cycles. 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 
Proposed FY 2025-26 Budget
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Infrastructure Maintenance
Alley Renewal Program $500,000 
Computer Replacement Contributions - General Fund Deferral $3,570,000 
Main Library Security Camera Replacement $107,100 
Parking Facilities Renewal Program $2,310,000 
Parking Structure #1 Complete Remodel $14,038,605 
Promenade Kiosk $504,000 
Public Safety Facility Security and Tenant Improvements $231,000 
Replacement Program For Parking Access & Revenue Control Systems and Equipment $27,954,465 
Safety Upgrades for Santa Monica Public Library $924,000 
Surface Parking Lot Repaving Program (General Fund and Beach Fund) $11,550,000 
Vehicle Replacement Contributions - General Fund Deferral $8,463,000 
City Yards Modernization - Michigan Ave Improvements $16,000,000 
Camera Obscura/Art Lab Facility Maintenance $1,052,876 
Downtown Parking Structures Guardrail and Waterproofing Upgrades $8,100,000 
Property Room Solutions, Improvements, and Updates $1,028,000 
Annual Paving and Sidewalk Repair Program $350,000 
Main Library Central Courtyard Revitalization $283,000 
Urban Forest and Planting  Renewal $300,000 
Civic Structure Decorative Feature Repair $710,000 
Civic Structure Elevator Replacement $3,100,000 
Farmers Market Vehicle Barrier $1,317,056 
Historic City Hall North Wing Building System Upgrades $11,589,000 
Main Library Landscaping - Soil Compaction $130,000 
Rebuilding of Beach Lot 4S Decorative Plaza $283,000 
Santa Monica Swim Center spare boiler $76,000 
Swim Center Engineering of air flow and water HVAC lines $2,280,000 
Facility Renewal Program $20,695,165 
Unfunded Projects
Projects will be considered in future funding cycles. 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 


===== PAGE 299 =====

284
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 UNFUNDED PROJECTS
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 

===== PAGE 300 =====

285
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
CAPiTAL iMPROvEMENT PROGRAM - FY 2025-26 UNFUNDED PROJECTS
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Virginia Avenue Park Thelma Terry Community Room Improvements $90,000 
Sports Lighting Replacement Program $942,000 
Subtotal $204,401,396 
Pier and Beach
Beach and Pier Master Plan (Phase 2) $1,386,000 
Pier Deck Upgrade $12,589,500 
Pier West End Substructure Upgrade $6,121,500 
Subtotal $20,097,000 
Streetscape and Lighting
Lincoln Corridor Streetscape (Phase 2) $8,316,000 
Promenade Lighting Project $11,979,000 
Copper Wire Protection Program $500,000 
Crossing, Calming, and Safety Improvements at 23rd St. and Hill St. $275,337 
Streetlight Modernizations (General Fund ) $2,000,000 
Public Safety Facility - Interior Communication and Connectivity Project $844,000 
Subtotal $23,914,337 
Miscellaneous
Fire Self Contained Breathing Apparatus Replacement $550,000 
Reframe: City Hall Mural new HCH lobby artwork and interpretive signage $400,000 
Citywide Infrastructure Safety Assessment and Implementation $615,000 
Fire PSF Office Reconfiguration $90,000 
Promenade Maintenance Relocation $1,000,000 
Public Art deferred repair catch-up and maintenance $800,000 
Public Safety Communications Workstation Upgrade $741,000 
Public Safety Facility Office and Furniture Renovation (PD) $1,544,000 
Reframe: City Hall Mural cultural assessment of City monuments and public artwork $650,000 
SM28/ CELEBRATE28 $3,000,000 
Subtotal $6,390,000 
 
Total Unfunded $456,647,384 
 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Virginia Avenue Park Thelma Terry Community Room Improvements $90,000 
Sports Lighting Replacement Program $942,000 
Subtotal $204,401,396 
Pier and Beach
Beach and Pier Master Plan (Phase 2) $1,386,000 
Pier Deck Upgrade $12,589,500 
Pier West End Substructure Upgrade $6,121,500 
Subtotal $20,097,000 
Streetscape and Lighting
Lincoln Corridor Streetscape (Phase 2) $8,316,000 
Promenade Lighting Project $11,979,000 
Copper Wire Protection Program $500,000 
Crossing, Calming, and Safety Improvements at 23rd St. and Hill St. $275,337 
Streetlight Modernizations (General Fund ) $2,000,000 
Public Safety Facility - Interior Communication and Connectivity Project $844,000 
Subtotal $23,914,337 
Miscellaneous
Fire Self Contained Breathing Apparatus Replacement $550,000 
Reframe: City Hall Mural new HCH lobby artwork and interpretive signage $400,000 
Citywide Infrastructure Safety Assessment and Implementation $615,000 
Fire PSF Office Reconfiguration $90,000 
Promenade Maintenance Relocation $1,000,000 
Public Art deferred repair catch-up and maintenance $800,000 
Public Safety Communications Workstation Upgrade $741,000 
Public Safety Facility Office and Furniture Renovation (PD) $1,544,000 
Reframe: City Hall Mural cultural assessment of City monuments and public artwork $650,000 
SM28/ CELEBRATE28 $3,000,000 
Subtotal $6,390,000 
 
Total Unfunded $456,647,384 
 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 
Project Title Estimated Project 
Costs
Subtotal $137,446,267 
New Infrastructure or Technology
License Plate Camera Recognition Program $1,260,000 
EV Action Plan Implementation - EV Charging $3,630,000 
Fire Station 3 Facility Design/Build Assessment, Demo, and New Facility | Fire Station #3 
Design/Build $25,986,884 
Fire Station 7 (Permanent Solution) | Fire Station #7 Design/Build $24,747,500 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Auditorium AV Infrastructure Improvement $194,000 
SMPD Vehicle Radio, Cradlepoint, and Antennas Replacements $1,200,000 
City Fleet Electrification Infrastructure $1,665,000 
Fire Department Training Center Construction - Phase III $5,000,000 
Park Maintenance Electrical Equipment Pilot Program $525,000 
Proactive Video Monitoring and Security Services $190,000 
Subtotal $64,398,384 
Parks
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 1 (add $20M from SMC) $16,800,000 
Airport Park Expansion $54,450,000 
Airport Park Parking Lot and Pathway Replacement $298,100 
Crescent Bay Park Improvements $3,996,300 
Memorial Park Expansion Phase 2-3 $100,320,000 
Pickleball Courts | Pickleball Courts at Airport Extension $5,940,000 
Reed Park Dog Park $605,000 
Reed Park Community Garden $370,000 
New Athletic Sports Field at Airport Extension $12,425,000 
Safety Netting for Memorial Park and Clover Park fields $1,100,000 
Tennis Court Resurfacing $1,000,000 
Tennis Courts Windscreens $249,000 
Tongva Park Bollard Replacement $895,000 
Turf Replacement Airport Park Field $1,512,996 
VAP Overflow Parking Lot into Permanent Parking Area $3,000,000 
VAP Teen Center Courtyard Shade $335,000 
Virginia Avenue Park Center Lobby and Corridor Upgrade $73,000 


===== PAGE 301 =====

FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX

===== PAGE 302 =====

286
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - TARGET BUDGET ENHANCEMENTSFY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
TARGETED BUDGET ENHANCEMENTS 
 
The table below outlines proposed adjustments to the General Fund, including position additions and deletions, all of which 
maintain a net-zero cost impact by reallocating funds within department budgets or utilizing new revenues. Adjustments in other 
funds are supported by available fund balances, ensuring their continued solvency throughout the forecast period. 
 
   Stafﬁng Changes a Operating Expenses 
Funding Source Department(s) Description Permanent  
FTE 
As-needed 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
General Fund Transportation Stafﬁng change to advance road safety, fully 
funded by reallocation of funds within the 
department's budget.   
 
- Convert Transportation Technician from 0.5 
FTE to 0.75 FTE 
0.25 - -   -   
General Fund Fire Department Stafﬁng change to align positions with 
operational responsibilities and departmental 
needs, fully funded by reallocation of funds 
within the department's budget.  
 
- Add 1 Permanent Fire Equipment Specialist 
and delete 0.44 FTE As-Needed Fire Equipment 
Specialist 
1.0 (0.44) -    -   
General Fund 
Housing and 
Human Services 
Communications and Marketing Coordinator 
position to promote access to affordable 
housing and social services safety net 
programs, funded 25% from Housing Authority 
Fund, 25% from the Housing Trust Funds in the 
Special Revenue Source Fund, and the 
remainder through reallocation of funds within 
the General Fund. 
 
- Add 1 Communications and Marketing 
Coordinator 
1.0 - -   -   
Housing 
Authority Fund 
- - 37,727  40,008  
Special Revenue 
Source Fund 
- - 37,726  40,008  
General Fund Housing and 
Human Services  
Stafﬁng change to enhance afterschool 
enrichment programming to engage 
underserved youth ages 6-17 at Police 
Assistance League (PAL), funded by  
reallocation of funds within the department's 
budget.  
 
- Convert Community Services Program 
Coordinator from 0.75 FTE to 1.0 FTE 
0.25 - -    -   
General Fund Housing and 
Human Services  
Policy and Performance Analyst to act as a 
resource navigator connecting underserved 
Santa Monica households to safety net 
services and needed community resources, 
funded by reallocation of funds within the 
department's budget. 
 
- Add 1 Policy and Performance Analyst 
1.0 - -   -   


===== PAGE 303 =====

287
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - TARGET BUDGET ENHANCEMENTSFY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
TARGETED BUDGET ENHANCEMENTS 
 
   Stafﬁng Changes a Operating Expenses 
Funding Source Department(s) Description Permanent  
FTE 
As-needed 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
General Fund Information 
Services 
Reorganization of the department to align 
with the City's current technology innovation 
and support needs.  These changes have net 
zero impact on the department's budget. 
 
- Add 1 Technology Program Manager and 
delete 1 User Experience Designer 
- Add 1 Technology Program Manager 
- Delete 1 Information Security Ofﬁcer 
-Delete 1 Customer Experience &  Support 
Manager 
- Add 1 Principal Business Process Technology 
Analyst (BPTA) and delete 1 BPTA  
- Add 1 Communications Engineer and delete 
1 Network Construction Assistant 
- Add 1 Systems Engineer and delete 1 
Systems Policy Engineer 
Add 1,960 as-needed hours for Administrative 
Interns 
(1.0) 0.9 -   -   
General Fund Recreation & Arts As-Needed position to enhance customer 
service for community events, meet the 
growing need for event permits, and create 
capacity to generate future revenue growth.  
This change has net zero impact to the 
General Fund, as it is funded by increased 
revenues.  
 
- Add 0.4 FTE As-Needed Event Coordinator 
- 0.4 30,587  30,587  
General Fund Recreation & Arts As-Needed support for the restoration of the 
Miles Playhouse and the Camera Obscura Art 
Lab to provide key cultural offerings to the 
community.  This change has net zero impact 
to the General Fund, as it is funded by 
increased revenues.  
 
- Add 0.1 FTE As-Needed Facilities Attendant 
-Add .0.3 FTE As-Needed Guest Services 
Assistant 
- 0.4 85,494  85,494  
General Fund Recreation & Arts Stafﬁng changes to better serve the diverse 
community of participants at the Santa 
Monica Swim Center, funded by reallocation of 
funds within the department's budget. .  
 
- Convert Permanent Guest Services Assistant 
from 0.6 FTE to 0.8 FTE and delete 0.2 FTE As-
Needed Guest Services Assistant 
0.2 (0.2) -   -   
General Fund Recreation & Arts As-Needed stafﬁng change in the Community 
Recreation division, to meet the needs of the 
community and changes in recreation 
demands, , funded by reallocation of funds 
within the department's budget..  
  
- Add 0.6 FTE As Needed Facilities Attendant 
and delete 0.5 FTE As-Needed Guest Services 
Assistant  
- 0.1 -   -   


===== PAGE 304 =====

288
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - TARGET BUDGET ENHANCEMENTSFY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
TARGETED BUDGET ENHANCEMENTS 
 
   Stafﬁng Changes a Operating Expenses 
Funding Source Department(s) Description Permanent  
FTE 
As-needed 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
Airport Fund Public Works Ongoing funding for contracted custodial 
services to ensure that all airport properties 
meet industry standards for sanitation. 
- - 171,974  175,413  
Airport Fund Public Works Stafﬁng change to align position with 
operational responsibilities.  
 
- Add 1 Airport Operations and Facilities 
Manager and delete 1 Airport Operations 
Administrator 
- - 40,040  39,942  
Airport Fund Public Works Senior Real Estate Property Manager to 
provide property management oversight and 
manage high-end lease negotiations.  
 
- Add 1 Senior Real Estate Property Manager 
1.0 - 188,015  199,215  
Airport Fund Public Works  Stafﬁng changes, including the conversion of 
limited term positions to permanent to align 
positions with operational responsibilities and 
departmental needs. 
-Add 1 Facilities Supervisor and delete 1 
Facilities Supervisor (limited-term) 
-Add 1 Airport Maintenance Worker and delete 
1 Airport Maintenance Workers (limited-term) 
-Add 1 Trades Intern and delete 1 Trades Intern 
(limited-term) 
-Add 1 Airport Maintenance Worker and delete 
1 Maintenance Assistant 
-Add 1 Staff Assistant III and delete 1 Airport 
Staff Assistant 
-Add 1 Staff Assistant III and delete 1 Staff 
Assistant III (limited-term) 
- Add 2 Property Management Specialists / 
delete 2.0 Property Management Specialists 
(limited-term) 
- - 17,600  17,557  
General Fund -Add 1 Project Support Assistant and delete 1 
Project Support Assistant (limited-term) funded 
by the Airport Fund through an interfund 
transfer.  This change has net zero impact to 
the General Fund. 
- - -    -   
Beach Fund Recreation & Arts Stafﬁng to increase stafﬁng capacity at the 
Annenberg Community Beach House to 
coordinate private events, expand city, 
community and cultural offerings, funded by 
reallocation of funds and increased revenue.  
 
- Add 0.5 FTE Event Coordinator  
-Add 0.75 Permanent Staff Assistant III and 
delete 0.5 FTE As-Needed Event Coordinator  
1.25 (0.5) 89,172  91,623  
Big Blue Bus Transportation Stafﬁng changes to assist with the 
administrative and marketing needs of the 
Community Engagement and Customer 
Experience Division.  
 
- Add 1 Assistant Administrative Analyst 
0.50 - 60,083  63,389  


===== PAGE 305 =====

289
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - TARGET BUDGET ENHANCEMENTSFY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
TARGETED BUDGET ENHANCEMENTS 
 
   Stafﬁng Changes a Operating Expenses 
Funding Source Department(s) Description Permanent  
FTE 
As-needed 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
Big Blue Bus Transportation Extension of limited term position to ensure 
transportation services to the community and 
support economic recovery efforts. This 
limited-term position ends on June 30, 2027.  
 
- Extend 1 Limited-Term Transit Training 
Coordinator 
1.0 - 125,374  133,123  
Big Blue Bus Transportation Stafﬁng to help establish the new Prohibition 
Order Program as approved by City Council on 
February 11, 2025 (Item 4.G). This is a limited-
term position ending on June 30, 2027. 
 
- Add 1 Limited-Term Administrative Analyst 
1.0 - 129,173  137,068  
Big Blue Bus Transportation Limited-term Motor Coach Operator 
Supervisor to improve efﬁciencies in transit 
operations. This is a limited-term position 
ending on June 30, 2027. 
 
- Add 1 Limited-Term Motor Coach Operator 
Supervisor 
1.0 - 119,608  126,973  
Cemetery Fund Public Works Funding to cover increased landscape 
maintenance costs, offset with corresponding 
cost recovery fee increases.  
  
- - 146,375  146,375  
Clean 
Beaches/Ocean 
Prcl Tx Fd 
Public Works Funding to cover the increased cost of water 
quality monitoring of urban runoff discharge in 
the Santa Monica Bay in order to maintain 
water quality levels and compliance with 
contractual obligations. 
- - 185,445  189,154  
Housing 
Authority Fund 
Housing and 
Human Services 
Funding for staff training to navigate evolving 
federal regulations, ensuring support for 
vulnerable populations who depend on 
housing opportunities and proper 
maintenance.  
- - 2,500  2,500  
Housing 
Authority Fund 
Housing and 
Human Services 
Funding for professional services in support of 
housing participants, including mental health 
support and translation services.  
- - 76,000  76,000  
Housing 
Authority Fund 
Housing and 
Human Services 
Funding for software to support daily housing 
operations by connecting households 
(individuals and families) to needed public and 
community resources.  
- - 10,500  10,500  
Housing 
Authority Fund 
Housing and 
Human Services 
Supervising Housing Specialist position to 
provide direct oversight and guidance to 
Housing Specialists who administer affordable 
housing programs in compliance with federal 
regulations and requirements.  
 
- Add 1 Supervising Housing Specialist and 
delete 1 Senior Housing Specialist 
- - 11,522  11,494  
Resource 
Recovery & Recyc 
Fund 
Public Works Funding for increasing costs associated with 
landﬁll services, hazardous waste 
management, and rent.  
- - 1,478,677  1,683,240  


===== PAGE 306 =====

290
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - TARGET BUDGET ENHANCEMENTSFY 2025-27 PROPOSED BIENNIAL BUDGET  
TARGETED BUDGET ENHANCEMENTS 
 
   Stafﬁng Changes a Operating Expenses 
Funding Source Department(s) Description Permanent  
FTE 
As-needed 
FTE FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27 
Resource 
Recovery & Recyc 
Fund 
Public Works Funding to cover the revised allocation of 
costs for utilities billing services. 
- - 172,031  177,208  
Resource 
Recovery & Recyc 
Fund 
Public Works Stafﬁng changes to align positions with 
operational responsibilities and divisional 
needs. 
 
- Add 1 RRR Business Supervisor and delete 1 
Lead RRR Billing Specialist 
- - 7,396  13,697  
Self-insur, Work 
Comp Fund and 
Risk Mgmt, 
Admin 
Finance and Non-
Departmental 
Stafﬁng changes to align positions with 
operational responsibilities in the Risk 
Management Division, funded by enterprise 
funds.  
 
- Add 1 Risk Management Analyst and delete 1 
Volunteer Coordinator 
- Add 1 Permanent Staff Assistant III and 
delete 0.5 FTE As-Needed Staff Assistant III 
1.0 (0.5) 72,636  84,747  
Water Fund Public Works Stafﬁng to support the Water Resources 
Division's expanded portfolio of facilities and 
infrastructure to increase local water supply 
and ensure regulatory compliance. 
 
- Add 1 Water Quality Supervisor 
1.00 - 188,361  199,588  
Wastewater Fund Public Works Stafﬁng to support the Water Resources 
Division's expanded portfolio of facilities and 
infrastructure to increase local water supply 
and ensure regulatory compliance. 
 
- Add 1 Water Chemist 
1.0 - 146,387  155,246  
  TToottaall  1111..55  00..22  33,,663300,,440033    33,,993300,,114499    
  
     
   GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd  116,081 116,081 
   AAllll  OOtthheerr  FFuunnddss  3,514,322 3,814,068 
     33,,663300,,440033  33,,993300,,114499  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Position changes are listed here, as all changes to position counts require Council approval.   
Note that the change of the total Permanent FTE count listed here (11.5) and the total in the Personnel and Stafﬁng section (10.5) of this document is 1.0 FTE.  The difference 
is as follows: 1.0 limited-term position is being extended. This position does not appear as changes in the Personnel and Stafﬁng section because it was already a budgeted 
limited-term position in FY 2024-25; therefore, continuing this FTE in FY 2025-26 does not change the count of FTEs year over year. 


===== PAGE 307 =====

291
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - BUDGET CALENDAR
March — April 2025
• Presentation of the Five-year financial forecast (FY 2025-26 through FY 2029-30)
• City Council receives public input and confirms budget priorities for Fiscal Year 
(FY) 2025-27
• Staff develops Proposed Biennial Budget
May 2025 • Publication of Proposed Biennial Budget document for FY 2025-27 
• Council Budget Study Session
June 2025 • Public hearing to adopt the Budget (adoption of first year of biennial budget and 
approval of second year budget plan)
July 1, 2025 • Start of new fiscal year - FY 2025-26
January — February 
2026
• Presentation of Five-year financial forecast (FY 2026-27 through FY 2030-31)
• Presentation of the FY 2025-26 mid-cycle budget review
May 2026 • Proposed adjustments to the FY 2026-27 approved budget plan presented to Council 
(exception-based budget adjustments)
June 2026 • Public hearing and budget adoption (adoption of second year approved budget plan for 
FY 2026-27)
July 1, 2026 • Start of new fiscal year - 2026-27
October 2026 • Presentation of the FY 2025-26 year-end budget review 


===== PAGE 308 =====

292
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES
GENERAL POLICIES
The City will maintain sound financial practices in accordance with all Federal, State and local laws and direct its 
financial resources towards meeting the City’s long-term goals.
The City will maintain and further develop programs to assure its long-term ability to pay the costs necessary to 
provide the level and quality of service required by its citizens.
The City of Santa Monica annually adopts a budget for the upcoming fiscal year. Through this budget, City Council 
establishes public policy by setting funding levels for departments and exercises control over City spending. The 
budget further serves as a financial planning tool to ensure that the inflow of resources (revenues) is adequate to 
meet both anticipated and unanticipated needs (expenditures).
FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY PHILOSOPHY
Santa Monica is committed to fiscal sustainability. 
Fiscal sustainability means maintaining a long-term view of financial planning that anticipates and proactively 
addresses risks to preserve and enhance quality of life and service provision as identified and prioritized through 
community input.
The City commits to: 
1. Informed decision-making  
City staff will identify and evaluate immediate and long-term economic, social, and environmental impacts 
of all issues provided for Council consideration.   
2. Transparency 
The City will conduct all business with transparency pursuant to applicable laws and regulations.  Santa 
Monica will proactively pursue ways to make financial information publicly available, accessible, and easy 
to understand.            
3. Aligned investments
Santa Monica pursues opportunities within the legal framework to align investments with the City’s values 
and priorities as adopted by the City Council.
4. Pursuing diversified revenue sources
The City will pursue diversified revenue sources that align with community priorities and support 
expenditures.
5. Managing long-term liabilities
The City will proactively identify and monitor long-term financial liabilities, including unfunded pension 
obligations, and commits to taking actions to manage these commitments that prioritize the City’s long-
term financial sustainability.  


===== PAGE 309 =====

293
THE BIENNIAL BUDGET
The City will follow a Biennial budget process, emphasizing long-range planning and effective program 
management. A biennial budget process allows staff to plan ahead, to take advantage of the efficiencies when not 
recreating the budget document each year to focus on strategic projects and capital budgeting, and has the added 
benefit of decreasing requested budget increases from one year to the next. 
The Biennial Budget will comply with the Charter of the City of Santa Monica, specifically Article Xv—Fiscal 
Administration, which provides the framework for the preparation and adoption of an annual budget for each 
fiscal year. This includes:
• Fiscal Year definition — July 1 through June 30.
• Proposed budget preparation by the City Manager, in consultation with each department head.
• Proposed budget submission to City Council at least 35 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year.
• Budget adoption by City Council on or before June 30 following a public hearing where stakeholders are 
given an opportunity to comment on the proposed budget.
Before the beginning of the second year of the two-year cycle, the Council will consider and approve the 
exception-based budget for the second year.
The mid-year budget review analyzes the budget status at the mid-point of the year and provides an opportunity 
to adjust revenue projections and make expenditure appropriation changes.
The year-end budget review makes budget transfers and additional appropriations, as necessary, to ensure that 
expenditures are within budget authority.
Budget modifications may occur as necessary at any City Council meeting through staff report proposals that 
receive five affirmative votes from the members of the Council. 
 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES
6. Shared responsibility
The City recognizes a shared responsibility between the employee and employer to appropriately fund 
employee benefits to attract and retain employees while maintaining a long-term sustainable and 
balanced budget.        
7. Seeking efficiency and effectiveness
Staff will continuously explore ways to operate more efficiently while preserving effectiveness.  


===== PAGE 310 =====

294
OPERATING BUDGET POLICIES
• The City will adopt a balanced budget annually by June 30.
• The City will make all current, ongoing expenditures with current, ongoing revenues, avoiding procedures 
that balance current budgets by postponing needed expenditures or accruing future revenues.
• The City will estimate revenues using an objective and analytical process; in the case of assumption 
uncertainty, conservative projections will be used.
• The City will maintain a level of expenditures that support essential services and promote quality-of-life to 
its citizens.
• The City will forecast its General Fund and other major fund expenditures and revenues for a five-year 
period and will update the forecast semi-annually. The forecast will be taken into consideration when 
preparing budget recommendations. 
• The City will endeavor to maintain a diversified and stable revenue system to minimize the impact of short-
term fluctuations in any one revenue source.
• The City will avoid targeting revenues for specific purposes whenever possible, allowing maximum flexibility 
in funding decisions on an annual basis.
• One-time revenues will be used for one-time expenditures only.
• The City will investigate potential new revenue sources, particularly those that will not add to the tax 
burden of residents and local businesses.
• The City will follow an accelerated pay down of its unfunded pension liability.  The acceleration will be for a 
period as further detailed in the section below titled Principles for Pension Funding. These payments will be 
in addition to the Annual Required Contribution (ARC). 
• Additionally, on April 11, 2023, City Council authorized staff to suspend the accelerated pay down 
of its unfunded pension liability from FY 2022-23 to FY 2027-28 or later, pending restoration of City 
services and maintenance budgets and reserves.
• The City will prefund other post-employment benefit obligations (OPEB) each year, setting aside the 
equivalent of the actuarially-determined ARC in an irrevocable trust. 
• The City will work proactively with the League of California Cities and local communities to monitor and 
impact legislation that may impact the City financially
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 311 =====

295
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP) BUDGET POLICIES
• The City will biennially plan for capital improvements for a five-year period. The CiP budget will incorporate 
Council priorities, community objectives, and projects that will improve operational efficiency. The CiP 
Biennial Budget will be presented to Council in the second year of the Operating Biennial Budget. 
• Future operating costs associated with new capital improvements will be projected and included in the 
Operating Budget forecasts.
• An inventory of the City’s physical assets, their condition, and remaining useful life will be maintained.
• The City will maintain all assets at a sufficient level to protect the City’s capital investment and to minimize 
future maintenance and replacement costs.
BUDGETARY CONTROL
The City Council is required to adopt an annual budget for all City departments and funds with the exception of 
the Rent Control Fund. The City Council also serves as the governing body for the Santa Monica Redevelopment 
Successor Agency, the Housing Authority, the Parking Authority, and the Public Financing Authority, which adopt 
budgets for the Redevelopment Successor Agency, the Housing Authority and the Parking Authority Funds.
Adoption of the budget requires a majority Council vote (4 of 7 Council members).
The City Council approves any revisions that increase the total budgeted expenditures or revenues of any 
department and fund, and any changes to staffing levels, including budgeted permanent and as-needed full-
time equivalent positions. The City Manager is authorized by the City Council to allocate the budget to more 
detailed levels of control for administrative purposes. This includes changes between major object or program 
categories (i.e., Salaries & Wages, Supplies & Expenses including Capital Outlay, or Capital improvements) within a 
department. Budget changes to capital improvement program accounts that change or increase project scope must 
be approved by Council.
Changes to the budget due to emergency work, additional project costs exceeding the budget authority, or receipt 
of a grant, take place throughout the year through semi-monthly Council meetings. Citywide comprehensive 
budget review takes place twice a year.
To change the budget after it is adopted requires a supermajority Council vote (5 of 7 Council members).
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 312 =====

296
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
Essential to the development of Santa Monica’s annual budget is feedback from individuals and organizations 
regarding issues or programs that they believe need to be addressed with additional resources. input from the 
community is received through Santa Monica’s 311 Program, and through the various forums presented by City 
boards, commissions and community groups. Additional opportunity for public comments occurs at City Council 
meetings when various budget updates and priority setting reports are presented and during the formal public 
hearing on the proposed budget each June.
CITY OF SANTA MONICA PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT POLICY 
The City of Santa Monica supports the use of data to drive and inform decision making processes and deliver 
reliable results to create a model 21st Century government and will strive to develop a comprehensive system of 
performance measures. 
PRINCIPLES FOR PENSION FUNDING
(in response to the severe economic downturn resulting from the COviD-19 pandemic, on May 5, 2020, the City 
Council authorized suspension of the FY 2020-21 and FY 2021-22 accelerated payments and a shift from a 13-year 
to a 15-year schedule. Additionally, on April 11, 2023, City Council authorized staff to suspend the accelerated pay 
down of its unfunded pension liability from FY 2022-23 to FY 2027-28 or later, pending restoration of City services 
and maintenance budgets and reserves.)
in view of continuing pension challenges, and following resident interest in the City’s plan to manage pensions, 
in November 2018 the City Manager established an ad hoc advisory committee made up of residents and City 
employees to discuss the City’s pension obligation.  The Committee’s purpose was to study the issue, look at 
alternatives, and develop sensible recommendations for the City Manager to consider in the development of a 
proposed sustainable budget for community and City Council consideration.  The Committee considered scenarios 
from the independent actuary; information from City staff on the budget process, past actions, and City’s financial 
status and resources; other cities’ practices and experiences; and research from group members.  The Committee 
unanimously voted to recommend principles for an approach to pension obligation management that endorse a 
proactive approach to pension obligation management that minimizes total funds spent over time by decreasing 
the interest accrued. Moreover, the Pension Advisory Committee recommended an accelerated plan to pay down the 
City’s current pension unfunded liability over 13 years, to conclude in FY 2032-33. The following are the Principles:
• The GFOA and the California Actuarial Advisory Panel (CAAP) believe it is financially advantageous to repay 
or amortize unfunded pension liabilities. The Pension Advisory Committee believes the unfunded liability 
represents a looming threat to Santa Monica’s safety and quality of life through erosion of vital services; 
undermining workforce compensation and job security; and damaging the City’s long-term fiscal health.  
• The Pension Advisory Committee believes the City should maintain prudent funded status levels and an 
aggressive repayment plan to ensure that funds are available in the long run to meet City obligations and 
preserve financial flexibility to meet or maintain City obligations consistent with values of the City. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 313 =====

297
• The Pension Advisory Committee believes the City should formally commit to a repayment period of not-
to-exceed 13 years for the current unfunded pension liability, concluding in FY 2032-33.  By following this 
recommendation, the City is projected to save approximately $100 million. 
• in the event of a fiscal emergency, the Council would have the option to reduce the annual payment for that 
fiscal year to the amount required for a 15-year repayment schedule (as calculated in 2019), concluding in 
FY 2034-35, only after holding a public hearing and making appropriate findings.
BASIS OF BUDGETING
Basis of budgeting for the City’s budget is consistent with the Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR) with 
a few exceptions, primarily in non-cash adjustments.
Governmental funds, including general, special revenue, and capital project funds, are budgeted on a modified 
accrual basis with a focus on near-term inflows and outflows of financial resources. Revenues are recognized when 
they are measurable and available, while expenditures are recognized as soon as liabilities are incurred, except for 
debt service, capital lease obligations, inventories, and prepaid items. Year-end encumbrances are included in the 
fiscal year’s expenditures (actual, budgetary basis), as they represent financial resources committed for goods or 
services to be delivered in the near future (usually within one or two months). However, many multi-year capital 
projects are budgeted on a full cost basis. Year-end remaining capital budgets for active projects are continued to 
the next fiscal year until the completion of the project.
Proprietary funds, including enterprise and internal service funds, are budgeted on an accrual basis similar to 
private-sector businesses, with a focus on total economic resources. Revenues are recognized when they are 
earned, while expenses are recognized when the liability is incurred. Year-end encumbrances are excluded from 
the fiscal year’s expenses, for the transactions have not yet occurred. However, non-cash items, such as investment 
adjustments to market value, depreciation, amortization and bad debt expense are not budgeted. Just as with the 
governmental funds, multi-year capital projects are often budgeted on a full cost basis and the year-end active 
project budgets are continued to the next year until the completion of the project.
General Fund
Special Revenue Funds
Capital Project Funds
Enterprise Funds
internal Service Funds
Basis of Accounting Modified Accrual Accrual
Exceptions: • Multi-year capital project budgets 
are generally budgeted on a full cost 
basis 
• Multi-year capital project budgets 
are generally budgeted on a full cost 
basis 
• Non-cash items, such as investment 
adjustments to market value, are not 
budgeted 
• Non-cash items, such as investment 
adjustments to market value, 
depreciation, amortization, bad debt 
expense, are not budgeted
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 314 =====

298
APPROPRIATIONS LIMIT 
The Council will annually adopt a resolution establishing the City's appropriations limit (the Gann Limit) calculated 
in accordance with Article Xiii-B of the Constitution of the State of California, Section 7900 et seq. of the State of 
California Government Code, and any other voter approved amendments or state legislation that affect the City's 
appropriations limit. Under the Gann Limit, a maximum amount is established for tax-funded government services. 
That amount is to be adjusted each year depending on city population, changes in non-residential assessed value, 
and the transfer of financial responsibility for various governmental activities from one level of government to 
another. Any significant amount of state tax revenue received above that Gann Limit is to lead to future tax 
rebates or tax cuts.
The supporting documentation used in calculating the City's appropriations limit and projected appropriations 
subject to the limit will be available for public and Council review at least 15 days before Council consideration of 
a resolution to adopt an appropriations limit. The Council will generally consider this resolution in connection with 
final approval of the budget.
FUND POLICIES
GENERAL FUND
The City will maintain at the end of FY 2024-25 a General Fund Operating Contingency reserve at a level that is 
equal to at least 14.0%, and at the end of FY 2025-26 a level that is equal to at least 14.5%, of the following 
year’s General Fund annual operating and capital expenditure budget and subsidies to other funds covered by 
ongoing revenues as originally adopted by Council.  Strong reserves allowed the use of contingency and economic 
uncertainty funds during the severe economic downturn that resulted from the pandemic, while the City retained 
a stable Rainy Day Fund reserve level of 12.5% of ongoing expenditures in the event of a new emergency.  As 
revenues continue to recover, the City is committed to increase its Contingency reserve by 0.5 percentage point a 
year until it once again reaches 15% in FY 2026-27.
Council approval will be required before expending funds from the Operating Contingency.  
in addition to the General Fund Contingency, the City’s goal is to maintain an Economic Uncertainty reserve 
balance with the level to be established as needed.
The City will maintain a balance in the General Fund for earned vacation benefits of General Fund employees. 
Compensated absences for all employees are recorded in the respective funds.
The City will seek to maintain sufficient funds in its fund balance to act as potential capital contingency fund 
balance. This balance is intended to be used for major capital repair where facility failure, unexpected hazards, or 
destruction of City property has occurred and where repair or replacement is not planned within the established 
capital, operations, or other replacement funds.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 315 =====

299
EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUNDS 
The City will maintain a Fleet Replacement Fund to provide for the timely replacement of vehicles and related 
equipment. To the extent possible, the City will maintain a minimum fund balance in the Fleet Replacement Fund 
of at least 15% of the original purchase cost of the items accounted for in this fund. The annual contribution to this 
fund will generally be based on the annual use allowance, which is determined based on the estimated life of the 
vehicle or equipment and its original purchase cost. 
i
nterest earnings and sales of surplus equipment as well as any 
related damage and insurance recoveries will be credited to the Fleet Replacement Fund. 
The City will maintain a Computer Equipment Replacement Fund to provide for the timely replacement of 
information hardware technology. The annual contribution to this fund will generally be based on the annual use 
allowance, which is determined based on the estimated life of the equipment and its original purchase cost. To the 
extent possible, the City will maintain a minimum fund balance in the Computer Equipment Replacement Program 
of at least 25% of the original purchase costs of the items accounted for in this fund. 
WATER, WASTEWATER AND RESOURCE RECOVERY AND RECYCLING FUNDS 
The City will maintain reserves for the purposes of offsetting unanticipated fluctuations in Water, Wastewater 
or Resource Recovery and Recycling Fund revenues and expenditures to provide financial stability, including the 
stability of revenues and the rates and charges related to each Enterprise. The reserves are based on the following: 
Water Fund 
•
Operating and capital reserves based on industry and bond rating agency best practices
.
• A rate stabilization reserve based on industry best practices
.
Wastewater Fund 
•
Operating and capital reserves based on industry and bond rating agency best practices
.
• A rate stabilization reserve based on industry best practices
.
Resource Recovery and Recycling Fund 
• Operating and capital reserves based on industry and bond rating agency best practices
.
FUND BALANCE CLASSIFICATIONS
The City’s fund balance is made of the following components, or classifications:
• Non-spendable fund balance typically includes inventories
, prepaid items and other items, that by definition
cannot be appropriated.
• The restricted fund balance category includes amounts that can be used only for the specific purposes
stipulated by constitution,
 external resource providers, or through enabling legislations.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 316 =====

300
• The committed fund balance classification includes amounts that can be used only for the specific purposes 
determined by a formal action of the City Council. The City Council has authority to establish, modify, or 
rescind a fund balance commitment.
• Amounts in the assigned fund balance classification are intended to be used by the City for specific 
purposes but do not meet the criteria to be classified as restricted or committed. The City Manager or 
designee has the authority to establish, modify or rescind a fund balance assignment.
• Unassigned fund balance is the residual classification for the City’s funds and includes all spendable 
amounts not contained in the other classifications.
The City considers restricted or unrestricted amounts to have been spent when an expenditure is incurred for 
purposes for which both restricted and unrestricted fund balance is available.
The City’s committed, assigned, or unassigned amounts are considered to have been spent when an expenditure is 
incurred for purposes for which amounts in any of those unrestricted fund balance classification could be used.
INTERFUND TRANSFERS AND LOANS
in order to achieve important public policy goals, the City has established various special revenue, capital project, 
debt service and enterprise funds to account for revenues whose use should be restricted to certain activities. 
Accordingly, each fund exists as a separate financing entity from other funds, with its own revenue sources, 
expenditures and fund equity.
Any transfers between funds for operating purposes are clearly set forth in the Biennial Budget. From time to time, 
interfund borrowing may be appropriate; however, this is subject to the following criteria in ensuring that the 
fiduciary purpose for that fund is met:  The Council must approve temporary interfund loans, while the Director of 
Finance and the City Manager are authorized to negotiate and approve terms and conditions of those loans.
Plan to replenish funds leveraged to help pay for sexual abuse claims
During the Budget Adoption Council meeting on June 27, 2023, a motion was passed asking staff to return 
to Council with a payment plan that would commit the City to replenishing the impacted funds, namely the 
Housing Trust Fund, Water Fund, and Workers’ Compensation Fund.  The following plan was presented to and 
adopted by Council on October 24, 2023 as part of the FY 2022-23 Year-End Budget Review:
The City’s Liability Program provides funding to investigate, defend and pay all damages for liability claims and 
lawsuits filed against the City. The Liability Program is self-insured to $1 million (the self- insurance retention, 
or SiR). Each department and fund within the City contributes to the self insurance fund annually based on an 
actuarial valuation that amortizes the liabilities over time and functional area.
Additional liability insurance limits are secured through the Authority for California Cities Excess Liability 
(ACCEL), a joint powers authority of which the City is a member. At the time of the initial settlement, ACCEL 
self-insured all losses from $1 million to $10 million.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 317 =====

301
Excess liability insurance is then purchased to cover losses over the ACCEL limits.
From May 2020 to July 2022, the City settled sexual abuse claims against by a former City employee and 
volunteer. The settlements totaled $107.325 million. The settlement amounts exceeded the SiR and ACCEL 
limits, which together totaled $13 million ($2 million in SiR, $11 million in ACCEL). The remaining amount 
of $94.325 million was paid up front using General Fund reserves but was also tendered to the City’s excess 
liability insurers for reimbursement.
On April 25, 2023, the City Council approved an additional settlement agreement to pay $122.5 million on 
additional claims related to one of the former employees. As the SiR and ACCEL limits were previously reached, 
the full $122.5 million was paid up front using City funds, while the claim was tendered to the City’s excess 
liability insurers for reimbursement. Given the previous $94.325 million payment from the General Fund, the 
significant revenue losses that the General Fund has suffered as a result of the COviD pandemic, and the 
continuing reduced levels of service in the General Fund due to reduced revenue levels and competing needs, 
funding sources in addition to the General Fund were needed to make the payment.
The funding sources for the $122.5 million settlement were as follows:
• $65.3 million from General Fund reserves
• $6.5 million from the General Fund portion of the Workers’ Compensation Fund
• $25 million from the Housing Trust Fund’s General Fund contributions
• $5.6 million from the deferral of the FY 2022-23 Measure GSH contribution from the General Fund to the 
Housing Trust Fund
• $5.1 million from the deferral of the FY 2023-24 Measure GSH contribution from the General Fund to the 
Housing Trust Staff has determined that this transfer will be feasible, and has been budgeted, in FY 2023-
24, reducing the need to include it in the payback plan.
• $15 million from Boeing Gillette settlement funds held in the Water Fund
in addition, a $5.9 million Measure GSH FY 2020-21 transfer to the Housing Trust Fund from the General Fund, 
retained per Council authorization on May 5, 2020 to help the General Fund meet spending needs during 
the economic downturn resulting from the COviD pandemic, is still pending. Staff would like to include the 
payment of this amount as part of this payment plan.
The General and non-General Fund reserves used were not legally restricted as to use, but it is the City’s intent 
that the fund balances of all affected funds be replenished. This plan, however, must take into consideration 
the current climate of scarce resources, significant contingent liabilities, and uncertain future revenue 
projections. Certain conditions must be met annually for the City to maintain its operational and financial 
stability. Specifically, these conditions fund current operations, known liabilities, and mandated reserve levels. 
These financial obligations must be considered in the order of financial risk when developing each year’s 
budget.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 318 =====

302
Priority 
Level Fund Target Explanation and Risk Level
1.1 General Fund Rainy Day Fund 
rebuilt by 0.5% 
increments 
annually until 15% 
target reached
To maintain essential services in the event of 
an economic crisis or natural disaster as well as 
exhibit the City’s financial stability to credit rating 
agencies, allowing access to lower cost financing, 
it is necessary to pursue Council-adopted targets to 
gradually rebuild the Rainy Day fund balance as 
set out in the Fiscal Policies reaching 15% of annual 
expenditures for the FY 2027-28 Budget. 
1.2 Workers’ 
Compensation 
Fund
Fund reserve level 
to at least 75% 
confidence level 
(striving for 90%)
To ensure that the Workers’ Compensation Fund 
has adequate funds set aside to make stipulated 
payments related to indemnity, medical and 
miscellaneous liabilities for all claims, a valuation of 
the liability and reserve levels is done annually to 
determine contributions from various funds to the 
Workers’ Compensation Fund to achieve a certain 
confidence level. A confidence level is the statistical 
certainty that an actuary believes funding will be 
sufficient. Failure to do so would threaten annual 
operations as funds would need to be reallocated.
1.3 General Fund Maintain positive 
balance of annual 
Revenues and 
Expenditures for 5 
years
To maintain current service levels and be able 
to address any emerging concerns that threaten 
the active pursuit of the City’s Council-adopted 
priorities, the General Fund forecast must show 
a positive balance over 5 years, provided that all 
resources necessary to maintain service levels have 
been considered. This will require the use of working 
capital currently assigned in the fund balance for 
this purpose.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES
The following conditions must be met each year at the time the 5-year forecast is presented to 
Council along with the Midyear Budget Review. items are prioritized based on financial risk level. At 
this time, no further funding is needed to meet these targets during the FY 2025-27 Biennial Budget 
period. However, needs are subject to change based on external factors that cannot be controlled by 
the City.


===== PAGE 319 =====

303
Priority 
Level Fund Target Explanation and Risk Level
1.4 Water Fund Required transfer 
of $15 million to 
cover pollution 
remediation 
liability
To ensure the maintenance of water services 
and water sustainability improvements without 
negatively impacting ratepayers or water quality, 
the Water Fund is required to allocate $15 million 
towards pollution remediation activities at a rate of 
$1.25 million annually from FY 2029-30 to FY 2034-
35, and $1.5 million annually in FY 2035-36, with 
minimum transfers of $600,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2036-37 through FY 2046-47.
1.5 General Fund Maintain at 
least $21 million 
annual Capital 
improvement 
Program allocation
To sufficiently maintain infrastructure and equipment 
replacement, assets critical to the health and welfare 
of the community, a minimum of $21 million is 
needed for deferred maintenance to restore, repair, 
and construct physical assets, to replace vehicles and 
technology hardware, and to update major software. 
Target begins in FY 2024-25.
While funding for the Workers’ Compensation Fund and Water Fund operations will be accommodated through 
annual assessments as noted in the table above, General Fund and Housing Trust Fund reserves will be 
replenished from funds received from the excess liability insurers and from the proceeds of the sales of General 
Fund-owned properties as follows:
• To replenish funds previously set aside for affordable housing programs and projects, transfer 50% of one-
time funds from General Fund property dispositions and insurance proceeds to the Housing Trust Fund, up 
to the target amount of $36.5 million.
• To rebuild reserve funds that will protect the City from future contingent liabilities, economic uncertainty, 
and community priority capital projects, allocate a minimum of 50% of one-time funds from property 
dispositions or insurance proceeds to the General Fund Other Purposes reserve, up to the target amount of 
$65 million.
INDIRECT COST ALLOCATION FOR GENERAL FUND SERVICES
Proprietary and special revenue fund programs, which are financed by service user fees or grant funding, are 
assessed administrative costs to reflect the true costs of doing business through the City’s indirect cost allocation 
plan. This plan provides a reimbursement to the General Fund for central services costs such as custodial services, 
personnel services, financial services, facilities maintenance, legal services, and administrative time, which is 
directly applicable to enterprise and special revenue fund operations. Data used in determining cost allocation 
is gathered from the last audited annual financials. Cost allocation plan updates will occur, at a minimum, every 
five years. During years between updates, a factor reflecting a blended expenditure increase will be added to the 
existing amount.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 320 =====

304
LIABILITY PROGRAM
This program provides funding to investigate, defend and pay all damages for liability claims and lawsuits filed 
against the City. The Liability Program is self-insured to $1 million (the self-insurance retention, or SiR). Each 
department and fund within the City contributes to the self insurance fund annually based on an actuarial 
valuation that amortizes the liabilities over time and functional area.
USER FEE COST RECOVERY GOALS
City policy is to charge for the full costs of services provided by City Staff when such services benefit individual 
users rather than members of the community as a whole. The City has calculated the cost of providing various 
recreational services and opportunities to individuals and has discounted those costs to ensure that individuals 
will be able to utilize these services and opportunities. Fees will be reviewed and updated on an ongoing basis to 
ensure that they keep pace with cost of living and service delivery changes. A comprehensive analysis of City costs 
and fees should be made at least every five years. in the interim, fees will be increased annually by a factor based 
on the annual increase in total compensation costs, unless otherwise stated for specific fees. Fees may also be 
adjusted during this interim period based on supplemental analysis whenever there have been significant changes 
in the method, level or cost of service delivery. 
ENTERPRISE FUND AND OTHER RATES
Water, Wastewater, Resource Recovery & Recycling 
The City will set rates at levels that fully cover the total direct and indirect costs, including operations and 
maintenance, capital outlay, and debt service of the Water, Wastewater, and Resource Recovery and Recycling 
programs.
Parking 
The City will set rates at levels that are needed to cover the costs to operate and maintain parking operations and 
structures, taking into account market conditions and City policies to encourage use of alternate transportation 
methods.
Big Blue Bus
Based on targets set under the Transportation Development Act, the City will strive to cover at least 20% of transit 
operating costs with fare revenues.
REPORTING POLICIES
ANNUAL REPORTING 
The City will prepare annual financial statements as follows:
• in accordance with Charter requirements, the City will contract for an annual audit by a qualified 
independent certified public accountant. The City will strive for an unqualified auditors’ opinion.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 321 =====

305
• An Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR) will be prepared and audited by a qualified independent 
public accounting firm.
• The City will strive to issue audited financial statements within 180 days after fiscal year end. 
• The City’s accounting and financial reporting systems will be maintained in conformance with generally 
accepted accounting principles and standards of the Government Accounting Standards Board, and reports 
will strive to meet the requirements of the GFOA’s Award for Excellence in Financing Reporting program.
INTERIM REPORTING 
The City will prepare and issue timely interim reports on the City’s fiscal status to the Council and staff. This 
includes:
• Online access to the City’s financial management system by City staff
• Monthly online reports for City staff use
• Midyear and year end reviews to Council and staff
INVESTMENT POLICY
An investment policy will be submitted annually to the City Council for review and adoption.
The City will invest public funds in a manner that will provide a market rate of return after ensuring optimum 
safety and meeting the daily cash flow demands of the City.
DEBT POLICY
BACKGROUND
The City maintains conservative financial policies to assure strong financial health both in the short- and 
long-term. The City issues debt primarily to finance large capital investments such as construction of public 
infrastructure or property acquisitions. 
Maintaining the City’s bond rating is an important objective of the City’s financial policies. To this end, the City is 
constantly working to improve its financial policies, budgets, forecasts, and financial health. 
Effective January 1, 2017, and in accordance with Section 8855 of the Government Code, California public 
agencies that issue public debt are required to certify prior to the issuance of debt that they have adopted debt 
policies concerning the use of debt and that the contemplated debt issuance is consistent with those local policies. 
The City’s Debt Policy set forth below complies with the requirements of Section 8855. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 322 =====

306
This debt policy shall apply to obligations issued by the City, the Santa Monica Public Financing Authority, the 
Santa Monica Parking Authority, and the Successor Agency to the Santa Monica Redevelopment Agency.
PURPOSE OF POLICY
This policy sets forth the criteria for issuance and repayment of debt. The primary objective of the Debt Policy is to 
establish criteria that will protect the City’s financial integrity while providing a funding mechanism to meet the 
City’s capital needs. The underlying approach of the City is, except in extraordinary circumstances, to borrow only 
for capital improvements that cannot be funded on a pay-as-you-go basis. The City will not issue long-term debt to 
finance current operations. 
All debt issued will be in compliance with this policy, the debt limit noted in Article vi of the City Charter and with 
all other relevant state and federal regulations.
A biennial review of the Debt Policy will be performed and any changes to the Debt Policy will be brought forward 
for City Council consideration and approval. Further, in the event there are any recommended deviations or 
exceptions from the Debt Policy when a certain bond issue is structured, those exceptions will be discussed in the 
staff reports when the bond issue is presented for City Council’s consideration.
RESPONSIBILITY
Authority to issue debt is given by the City Council, exercising the powers reserved to the City under Section 6 
of Article Xi of the Constitution of the State of California and Section 400 of the City Charter of the City of Santa 
Monica. The Treasurer and designated staff, assist in the duties of debt issuance, interest payments, principal 
repayments and other debt-related activities. 
The Finance Director is responsible for assuring that the activities related to the issuance and payment of bonds or 
other obligations will not jeopardize the bond rating. 
PURPOSE OF FINANCING
Except in extraordinary circumstances, the City borrows money to fund long-term capital improvement projects 
and to refinance existing debt. The issuance of debt to fund operating deficits is not permitted.
While the preferred means of financing projects is the “pay-as- you-go” method of using current revenues to pay 
for capital projects because it avoids interest payments, the City would be able to undertake capital projects under 
this method only if sufficient cash accumulates. Prudent use of debt financing rather than pay-as- you-go funding 
of capital projects can distribute the cost of a project over its useful life, facilitate better allocation of resources 
and increase financial flexibility. Debt can also be used in conjunction with pay-as-you-go financing to pay only a 
portion of the project using debt if insufficient funds are available from non-debt sources.
The City Treasurer and designated staff, will periodically evaluate the City’s existing debt and execute, upon 
approval of the City Council, a refinancing when economically beneficial. A refinancing includes the issuance of 
bonds to refund existing bonds.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 323 =====

307
See “Bond Refunding” for refunding considerations.
BUDGETING AND CAPITAL PLANNING
The City shall develop and maintain a Five-Year capital planning process that includes a Biennial Capital 
improvement Program budget and is approved and adopted by the City Council as part of the budget process. The 
capital plan is informed by the City’s Five-Year forecasting process. 
The decision to utilize debt to fund all or a portion of a capital project first requires an analysis by the Finance 
Department of how the debt will be repaid. The source of revenues to repay the debt must be identified and the 
impact of repayment of the debt on existing budget commitments must be assessed. 
The Finance Department is responsible for coordinating and analyzing the debt requirements. This will include 
timing of debt, calculation of outstanding debt, debt limitation calculations and compliance, impact on future debt 
burdens, and current revenue requirements. 
ASSET LIFE 
Generally, no debt will be issued for periods exceeding the useful life or average useful lives of projects to be 
financed. 
TYPES OF DEBT
The following is a description of the types of long-term debt the City may issue: 
General Obligation Bonds 
General Obligation (GO) bonds are secured by a pledge of full faith and credit of an issuer and a promise to levy 
taxes in an unlimited amount as necessary to pay debt service. GO bonds usually achieve lower rates of interest 
than other financing instruments since they are considered to be a lower risk. 
California State Constitution, Article 16 - Public Finance, Section 18, requires that the issuance of a GO bond by the 
City must be approved by a two-thirds majority of those voting on the bond proposition. Uses of bond proceeds 
are limited to the acquisition and improvement of real property. 
Lease Obligations 
Lease financings are long-term obligations that include Lease Revenue Bonds (LRBs) and Certificates of 
Participation (COPs). LRBs are lease obligations secured by an installment sale or by a lease-back arrangement 
between the City and the City’s Public Financing Authority, a joint powers authority, where City revenues are 
pledged to pay the lease payments, which are, in turn, used to pay debt service on the LRBs. Alternatively, COPs 
are lease obligations secured by a financing lease between the lessee, which would be the City, and a lessor, which 
may be the City’s Public Financing Authority, that undertakes the construction of a project. These obligations do 
not constitute indebtedness under the state constitutional debt limitation and, therefore, are not subject to voter 
approval. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 324 =====

308
Payments to be made under valid leases are payable only in the year in which use and occupancy of the leased 
property is available, and lease payments may not be accelerated. Lease financing requires the fair market rental 
value of the leased property to be equal to or greater than the required debt service or lease payment schedule. 
The governmental lessee is obligated to place in its Annual Budget the rental payments that are due and payable 
during each fiscal year the lessee has use of the leased property. 
Revenue Bonds 
Revenue bonds are obligations payable from revenues generated by an enterprise as defined in Section 54300 et 
seq. of the California Government Code. City issuance of revenue bonds is specifically authorized by Chapter 2.36 
of the City’s Municipal Code. Since the debt service is directly paid by the enterprise, such debt is considered self-
liquidating and generally is not considered as part of the maximum debt capacity of the issuer. 
The City’s utility Revenue Bonds are payable solely from the appropriate City Enterprise Fund and are not secured 
by any pledge of ad valorem taxes or general fund revenues of the City. in accordance with the agreed upon bond 
covenants, the revenues generated by these Enterprise Funds must be sufficient to maintain required coverage 
levels, or the customer rates of the enterprise have to be raised to maintain the coverages. The issuance of revenue 
bonds does not require voter approval. 
Bank Loans
Under certain circumstances, it may be advantageous to obtain financing through a direct bank loan. Bank 
loans can be in the form of fixed rate or variable rate loans with defined maturities or lines of credit that have 
variable interest rates and flexible payment provisions. One potential advantage of bank loans is that the process 
for execution is generally simpler and can be less expensive to issue than a public bond issue. Additionally, a 
bank loan can often be structured in a manner that more closely conforms with specific project or repayment 
considerations than a bond issue. However, since bank loans are issued in an environment less transparent than a 
public debt issue, it is more difficult to assess how the proposed loan rates, fees, and terms compare to the market. 
The City Treasurer will consult with the City’s Financial Advisor to determine when a bank loan is the appropriate 
financing measure.
Assessment District Financing
The Municipal improvement Act of 1913 provides for a local agency to form an Assessment District to finance 
certain infrastructure, including roadways, water and sewer facilities, storm drains, and other improvements often 
required in connection with new development. An Assessment District must include all properties that will benefit 
directly from the improvements to be constructed, and formation of the district requires an election in which at 
least 50% of property owners vote in favor of the district. if an Assessment District is formed, the City may levy 
assessments that can be utilized to directly finance the public improvements, or may be pledged to support debt 
service on bonds, which may be issued under the improvement Bond Act of 1915. The assessments that are levied 
upon each parcel must be based upon the direct and special benefit received by the property. 
LIMITATION OF INDEBTEDNESS
The City’s indebtedness is limited by Article vi of the City Charter, which states that the bonded indebtedness 
of the City may not exceed the sum of ten (10%) percent of the total assessed valuation of property within the 
City, exclusive of any indebtedness that has been or may hereafter be incurred for the purpose of acquiring or 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 325 =====

309
establishing a system of waterworks for the supplying of water, or for the purpose of constructing sewers or drains 
in the City, for which purposes a further indebtedness may be incurred by the issuance of bonds, subject only to the 
provisions of the State Constitution and of this Charter. The City will include all lease obligations when calculating 
its compliance under this debt limit even though they may not constitute bonded indebtedness.
AFFORDABILITY TARGETS
General Obligation Debt
The decision on whether or not to assume new general obligation debt shall be based on costs and benefits, 
current conditions of the municipal bond market, and the City’s ability to afford new debt and service as 
determined by an objective analytical approach. This process shall compare generally accepted measures of 
affordability to the current values for the City. These measures shall include:
• Debt per capita: the outstanding principal as a percentage of population. 
• Debt as a percent of assessed valuation: the outstanding principal as a percentage of assessed valuation. 
General Fund-Supported Debt 
The most important affordability ratio used in analyzing the City’s debt position with respect to General Fund 
supported debt (e.g., lease obligations) is the Annual General Fund debt service/lease payment (e.g., payment 
on lease revenue bonds) as a percentage of available revenue or expenditures. This ratio, which pertains to only 
general fund backed debt, is often referred to as “lease burden.” This analysis excludes enterprise revenue bonds 
and other obligations supported by dedicated revenue pledges. Additionally, this analysis may exclude other 
General Fund liabilities such as loan obligations or the City’s annually required contribution to the pension system 
or retiree health care costs. Liabilities of the City’s related agencies are also excluded from the debt affordability 
ratios. 
Credit rating agency guidelines recommend a lease burden ratio of no more than 12%; the City shall strive 
to maintain its lease burden ratio below 10%. Affordability analysis as determined by this measure will be 
undertaken before new General-Fund supported debt is issued. 
in addition to the City’s direct debt burden, debt levels of underlying and overlapping entities such as counties, 
school districts, and special districts add to a City’s overall debt burden. The City’s proportional share of the debt 
of other local governmental units, which either overlap it or underlie it, is called the overlapping debt. Overlapping 
debt is generally apportioned based upon relative assessed value. While the City does not control debt issuance by 
other entities, it recognizes that its taxpayers share the overall debt burden. The City shall include a statement of 
overlapping debt in its initial and continuing disclosure.
Revenue Bonds 
in determining the affordability of proposed revenue bonds, the City will perform an analysis comparing projected 
annual net revenues (after payment of operating and maintenance expense) to estimated annual debt service. 
Generally, legal covenants requiring a minimum coverage ratio are set forth in the bond documents, and are based 
on the level of security provided to the bondholders. The City’s revenue bonds require a legal coverage ratio of 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 326 =====

310
at least 120% for senior bonds and a coverage ratio of at least 100% for senior and subordinate debt combined. 
Credit rating agencies point to a target coverage ratio of 200% for programs with large ongoing capital needs 
and 150% for programs without such needs, using historical and/or projected net revenues to cover annual debt 
service for bonds issued on a subordinate basis which have a 100% legal coverage ratio requirement. The City will 
require a rate increase to cover both operations and debt service costs, and create debt service reserve funds to 
maintain the required coverage ratios.
STRUCTURE OF DEBT
Term of Debt
Debt will be structured consistent with a fair allocation of costs to current and future beneficiaries or users. 
Borrowings by the City should be of a duration that does not exceed the useful life of the improvement that it 
finances and where feasible, should be shorter than the projected economic life. The standard term of long-term 
borrowing is typically 15-30 years. 
Debt Repayment 
The City shall pay all interest and repay all debt in accordance with the terms of the bond ordinance and bond 
covenants. To the extent possible, the City will seek level or declining debt service repayment schedules.  However, 
in some cases the City may seek an alternative debt service schedule to meet certain policy or operational 
requirements.
Variable-Rate Securities 
When appropriate, the City may choose to issue securities that pay a rate of interest that varies according to a pre-
determined formula or results from a periodic remarketing of the securities. Due to the potential volatility of such 
instruments, the City will limit the use of variable-rate debt to the greater of $50 million or 20% of outstanding 
principal.
Derivatives
The City will not use derivatives when structuring debt.
Capitalized Interest 
Where appropriate, interest may be capitalized for the construction period of a revenue-producing project so that 
debt service expense does not begin until the project is expected to be operational and producing revenues.  
in addition, for lease back arrangements, such as those used for lease revenue bond transactions, interest may be 
capitalized for the construction period, until the asset is operational. Only under extraordinary circumstances will 
interest be capitalized for a period longer than the construction period. Capitalized interest is sometimes referred 
to as “funded interest.” 
Call Options/Redemption Provisions 
A call option, or optional redemption provision, gives the City the right to prepay or retire debt prior to its stated 
maturity. This option may permit the City to achieve interest savings in the future through refunding, or in some 
cases, full or partial redemption of the bonds. Generally, fixed rate tax-exempt municipal bonds are structured with 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 327 =====

311
a 10-year call at par (no premium). Because the cost of call options can vary widely, depending largely on market 
conditions, an evaluation of factors such as the following will be conducted in connection with each issuance:  
• The time until the bonds may be called
• The price at which the bonds may be called
• The potential to generate future interest cost savings (or call option value)
• Any need for additional flexibility with respect to repayment 
METHOD OF SALE
The City may issue its debt through a competitive or negotiated process.  The negotiated process would be used 
under the following conditions. 
• The bond issue is, or contains, a refinancing that is dependent on market/interest rate timing. 
• At the time of issuance, the interest rate environment or economic factors that affect the bond issue are 
volatile. 
• The nature of the debt is unique and requires particular skills from the underwriter(s) involved. 
• The debt issued is bound by a compressed time line due to extenuating circumstances such that time is of 
the essence and a competitive process cannot be accomplished, or a competitive process might result in 
selection of an underwriter or other situations inconsistent with City policies.
When determined appropriate by the City Treasurer, the City will negotiate financing terms with banks and 
financial institutions for specific borrowings on a private offering basis. Typically, private placements are carried 
out by the City when extraneous circumstances preclude public offerings, such as an interim financing, or to avoid 
the costs of a public offering for smaller issuances.
The City Treasurer will consult with the City’s Financial Advisor on an issue by issue basis to determine the 
appropriate method of sale to be used.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
The City’s Finance Department shall be responsible for the solicitation and selection of professional services 
that are required to administer the City’s debt program, which will follow the City’s Procurement Policy. The City 
Attorney’s Office will take the lead to solicit and select bond counsel. The financial advisor, bond and disclosure 
counsel, and trustee costs associated with the bond issuance will be paid with bond proceeds. Eligible City staff 
costs related to issuance of long term bonds may also be reimbursed from bond proceeds.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 328 =====

312
Financial Advisor 
A Financial Advisor(s) will be used to assist in the issuance of the City’s debt. The Financial Advisor will provide 
the City with objective advice and analysis on debt issuance. This includes, but is not limited to, monitoring market 
opportunities, structuring and pricing debt, and preparing official statements of disclosure.
Bond Counsel 
The City Attorney’s Office will take the lead in selecting and contracting with the Bond Counsel and Disclosure 
Counsel. All debt issued by the City will include a written opinion by bond counsel affirming that the City is 
authorized to issue the proposed debt. The opinion shall include confirmation that the City has met all City and 
state constitutional and statutory requirements necessary for issuance, a determination of the proposed debt’s 
federal income tax status and any other components necessary for the proposed debt. Bond counsel is also 
responsible for preparing all financing documents including Trust indentures and Bond resolutions and assists in 
preparation of Official Statements. Disclosure Counsel shall be required to deliver a customary 10(b)-5 opinion 
on City offering documents. The Disclosure Counsel will work with City staff to draft all disclosure documents for 
a bond financing. The City Attorney’s Office may engage separate firms in the capacity of Bond and Disclosure 
Counsel or one single firm to perform bond and disclosure counsel functions.
Underwriters 
An Underwriter(s) will be used for all debt issued in a negotiated or private placement sale method. The 
Underwriter is responsible for purchasing negotiated or private placement debt and reselling the debt to investors. 
Trustee/Fiscal Agent 
A Fiscal Agent and/or Third Party Trustee will be used to provide accurate and timely payment to bondholders and 
securities processing. if there are unspent bond proceeds, funds will be held by the third party trustee. The Finance 
Department will monitor funds held by third party trustees and review trustee bank statements on a monthly basis 
to ensure any expenditures from the trustee accounts are in accordance with the intended use of the bonds. 
CREDIT RATINGS
The City will maintain good communication with bond rating agencies about its financial condition. This effort 
will include providing periodic updates on the City’s general financial condition, coordinating meetings, and 
presentations in conjunction with a new issuance. The City will continually strive to maintain its bond rating by 
improving financial policies, budgets, forecasts and the financial health of the City. 
Credit enhancements may be used to improve or establish a credit rating on a City debt obligation. Credit 
enhancements should only be used if cost effective. 
REFUNDING DEBT
A debt refunding is a refinance of debt typically done to take advantage of lower interest rates.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 329 =====

313
Current Refunding
A current refunding is one in which the refunding bonds are issued no more than 90 days before the date upon 
which the refunded bonds will be redeemed. 
Advance Refunding
An advance refunding is one in which the refunding bonds are issued more than 90 days prior to the date 
upon which the refunded bonds will be redeemed. Advance refundings are used to refinance outstanding debt 
before the date the outstanding debt becomes due or callable. internal Revenue Code §149(d)(3) provides that 
governmental bonds issued after 1985 may only be advanced refunded once over the life of a bond issuance.  
Changes to the Federal tax law enacted in 2017 prohibit the issuance of advance refunding bonds after December 
31, 2017; however, it is possible this prohibition will be removed in the future.
Unless otherwise justified, such as a desire to remove or change a bond covenant, a debt refunding will require 
a minimum present value savings of 3%. This savings requirement for a refunding may be waived by the City 
Treasurer upon a finding that such a refunding is in the City’s overall best financial interest. 
DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND/SURETY POLICY 
in instances where there is no market or credit rating agency requirement to fund a debt service reserve, or where 
there is an economic cost associated with borrowing to fund a reserve fund, the City will attempt to avoid their 
use. if a debt service reserve funded by bond proceeds is determined to be necessary or in the City’s best interest, 
the debt service reserve fund will be held by and available to the Trustee to make principal and interest payments 
to bondholders in the event that pledged revenues are insufficient to do so. The maximum size of the reserve 
fund is generally governed by tax law, which permits the lesser of: 1) 10% of par; 2) 125% of average annual 
debt service; and 3) 100% of maximum annual debt service. Reserve funds are typically equal to approximately 
one year’s maximum debt service on the bonds. On a case-by-case basis, assuming there is no economic or credit 
disadvantage, the City may issue bonds with a debt service reserve fund that is sized at a lower level. 
The reserve fund requirement may also be satisfied by a surety policy, a form of insurance provided by a bond 
insurer to satisfy a reserve fund requirement for a bond issuance. Under this arrangement, instead of depositing 
cash in a reserve fund, the issuer buys a surety policy by paying a one-time premium equal to a percentage 
of the face amount of the policy. The City may use a surety policy instead of a debt service reserve fund when 
economically feasible. 
The City will not rely on any uncollateralized credit instruments for any reserve requirement unless justified by 
significant financial advantage. 
ARBITRAGE REBATE MONITORING AND REPORTING
The City will, unless otherwise justified, use bond proceeds within the established time frame pursuant to the 
bond ordinance, contract or other documents to avoid arbitrage rebate. Arbitrage is the interest earned on the 
investment of the bond proceeds at a rate above the interest rate paid on the debt. if arbitrage occurs, the City 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 330 =====

314
may be required to pay the amount of the arbitrage to the Federal Government as required by internal Revenue 
Service Regulation 1.148-11. The City will maintain a system of recordkeeping and reporting to meet the arbitrage 
rebate compliance requirement of the iRS regulation. For each bond issue not used within the established 
time frame, the recordkeeping shall include tracking investment earnings on bond proceeds, calculating rebate 
payments, and remitting any rebatable earnings to the federal government in a timely manner in order to preserve 
the tax-exempt status of the outstanding debt. 
TAX CERTIFICATE COMPLIANCE
The City will comply with requirements imposed in any tax certificate to maintain the tax-exempt status of the 
City’s bonds.
COVENANT COMPLIANCE
The City will comply with all covenants stated in the bond ordinance, contract, etc. 
DEBT ISSUANCE REPORTING
The City will comply with all state reporting requirements for issuance of debt, including a report to the California 
Debt and investment Advisory Commission (CDiAC) of any proposed debt issuance no later than 30 days prior 
to the sale of any debt issue. The report shall include a certification by the issuer that it has adopted local debt 
policies concerning the use of debt and that the contemplated debt issuance is consistent with these policies. 
The City shall also submit a report to CDiAC of final sale no later than 21 days after sale of debt, by any method 
approved by the CDiAC. The report on final sale shall include a copy of the official statement for the issue or, if 
there is no official statement, the other disclosure documents and indenture.
ONGOING DISCLOSURE
The City will meet secondary disclosure requirements in a timely and comprehensive manner, as stipulated by 
the SEC Rule 15c2-12. The City Treasurer shall be responsible for providing ongoing disclosure information to the 
Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board’s (MSRB’s) Electronic Municipal Market Access (EMMA) system, the central 
depository designated by the SEC for ongoing disclosures by municipal issuers. The City Treasurer is responsible for 
maintaining compliance with disclosure standards promulgated by state and national regulatory bodies, including 
the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB), the National Federation of Municipal Analysts, the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC), and Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). The City may also employ 
the services of firms that improve the availability of or supplement the City’s EMMA filings. The City will also 
complete and file an annual Debt Transparency Report with the California Debt investment Advisory Commission 
(CDiAC) in compliance with Section 8855 of the Government Code.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 331 =====

315
INVESTMENT OF BOND PROCEEDS
The proceeds of the bond sales will be invested until used for the intended project in order to maximize utilization 
of the public funds. The investments will be made to obtain the highest level of safety. The City of Santa Monica 
investment Policy and the bond indentures govern objectives and criteria for investment of bond proceeds. The City 
Treasurer and designee, or the bond trustees under the direction of the City Treasurer or designee, will invest the 
bond proceeds in a manner to avoid, if possible, and minimize any potential negative arbitrage over the life of the 
bond issuance, while complying with arbitrage and tax provisions.
in certain cases, particularly for bond reserve funds, it may be fiscally prudent to invest funds using a forward 
delivery agreement or some other type of guaranteed investment contract. Such agreements should be obtained 
under a competitive bid process under consultation with the Financial Advisor.
State and Local Government Securities (SLGS) are the preferred investment option rather than open market 
securities for escrows for refunded bonds to allow for better matching of settlement dates and fewer arbitrage 
regulation compliance issues.
INTERNAL CONTROL PROCEDURES
The City Treasurer is responsible for ensuring compliance with the Debt Policy. 
The Finance Department will monitor the expenditure of bond proceeds in a manner consistent with its monitoring 
of other City funds and will ensure that bond proceeds are expended exclusively for their authorized purpose. 
Specifically, the City’s Capital improvement Project budget will include appropriations specifically for the 
authorized purpose. Disbursement of bond proceeds from the trustee may be made either to reimburse the City for 
expenditures the City has made to project contractors or directly from the trustee to the contractor. in either case, 
the Finance Department will prepare the certificate or other required document requesting disbursement of funds 
by the trustee. internal control procedures will be reviewed and amended as necessary to ensure compliance.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - FiSCAL POLiCiES


===== PAGE 332 =====

316
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - DEBT FiNANCiNG SUMMARY
The City of Santa Monica annually adopts a budget for the upcoming fiscal year. Through this 
budget, City Council establishes public policy by setting funding levels for departments and 
exercises control over City spending. The budget further serves as a financial planning tool 
to ensure that the inflow of resources (revenues) is adequate to meet both anticipated and 
unanticipated needs (expenditures).
LEGAL DEBT LIMIT AND MARGIN (JUNE 30, 2024) 
Total Gross Assessed Value.........................................................................................................$50,898,076,000  
Debt limit: 10% of total assessed value (1)..............................................................................$5,089,807,600  
Amount of debt applicable to debt limit: 
 Total bonded debt.................................................................................$197,785,000 
 Less: Assets in debt service funds available for payment bonds............$10,797,876 
 Total amount of debt applicable to debt limit............................................................................$186,987,124 
Legal debt margin (2)....................................................................................................................$4,902,820,476 
(1)  Section 607 of the City Charter limits the bonded indebtedness of the City to 10% of the total assessed 
valuation of taxable properties within the City, exclusive of any indebtedness incurred for the purpose of 
constructing water supply, sewer or storm drain systems
(2)  As of June 30, 2024, the City's applicable outstanding debt was $4.90 billion under the legal debt limit. 
However, issuance of additional debt is not based solely on the legal debt limit, but also on the City's capacity to 
meet debt payment schedules with available revenue.
Source:  County of Los Angeles and City of Santa Monica Finance Department    


===== PAGE 333 =====

317
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - SUMMARY OF LONG-TERM iNDEBTEDNESS (JUNE 30, 2024)
    Date of Issue    Original Issue    Final Maturity 
Date    Interest Rates    Balance  
June 30, 2024
BONDS SUBJECT TO DEBT LIMIT:                     
Lease Revenue bonds:                     
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, 
Series 2021A
 
May 5, 2021
 
 $17,860,000 
 
July 1, 2031
 
4.00%
 
$17,860,000 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, 
Series 2021 (City Yards Modernization Project)
 
Aug 4, 2021
 
 $64,780,000 
 
July 1, 2051
 
2.125-5.00%
 
 $64,780,000 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, 
Series 2015 (Civic Center Parking Project)
 
July 9, 2015
 
 $26,360,000 
 
July 1, 2033
 
3.00-5.00%
 
$17,145,000 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, 
Series 2017 (City Services Building Project)(Green Bonds)
 
Sep 14, 2017
 
 $68,565,000 
 
July 1, 2047
 
3.00-5.00%
 
 $65,650,000   
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, 
Series 2018 (Downtown Fire Station Project)
 
Jun 6, 2018
 
$34,220,000  
 
July 1, 2048
 
3.625-5.00%
 
 $32,350,000   
Subtotal - Revenue bonds, governmental activities    $147,575,000  
Subtotal - Bonds Subject to Debt Limit:  $147,575,000   
                   
Other Debt:                     
Revenue bonds:                     
City of Santa Monica Water enterprise revenue bonds, Series 
2021   August 25, 2021    $70,525,000      August 1, 2051   2.25 - 5.00%    $69,145,000 
Subtotal - Revenue bonds:     $69,145,000 
Loans:                     
State Water Res Control Bd installment Sale Agreement   Sep 21, 2017   $56,046,630    Dec 31, 2052   1.80%    $52,068,703  
Subtotal - Loans:     $52,068,703 
                     
Subtotal - Other Debts:  $121,213,703 
                     
Total  $268,788,703   
Management believes it is in compliance with all debt covenants.         


===== PAGE 334 =====

318
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - DEBT SERviCE SCHEDULE
FY 2025-26 FY 2026-27
Bond Descriptions Principal Interest Total Principal Interest Total
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority 
Lease Revenue Bonds, Series 2021 (City Yards 
Modernization project)
$1,305,000    $2,133,250  $3,438,250  $1,370,000  $2,068,000 $3,438,000
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease 
Revenue Bonds, Series 2021A&B  $2,015,000  $636,800  $2,651,800  $2,095,000  $556,200  $2,651,200 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease 
Revenue Bonds, Series 2018
(Downtown Fire Station Project)
 $720,000  $1,426,638  $2,146,638  $755,000  $1,390,638  $2,145,638 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease 
Revenue Bonds, Series 2017
(City Services Building Project) (Green Bonds)
 $1,620,000 $2,799,200  $4,419,200  $1,700,000  $2,718,200  $4,418,200 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease 
Revenue Bonds, Series 2015
(Civic Center Parking Project)
 $1,490,000  $558,944  $2,048,944  $1,570,000  $484,444  $2,054,444 
Total - General Fund  $7,150,000  $7,554,832 $14,704,832  $7,490,000  $7,217,482 $14,707,482 
City of Santa Monica Water Enterprise Revenue 
Bonds, Series 2021  $1,495,000  $2,059,588  $3,554,588  $1,555,000  $1,998,588  3,553,588 
State Water Resources Control Board installment 
Sale Agreement1  $1,383,193  $937,237  $2,320,430  $1,408,091  $904,644  $2,312,735 
Total - Water Fund  $2,878,193  $2,996,825  $5,875,018  $2,963,091  $2,903,232  $5,866,323 
1 start date for repayment is subject to change based on completion date of the project


===== PAGE 335 =====

319
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - BOND RATiNGS
The City’s long-term financial strength is reflected in these ratings. The ratings from all three agencies were 
reaffirmed. Santa Monica’s consistently high ratings reflect both a strong local economy and the City’s history of 
strong and proactive financial management. Among the elements of the City’s  financial management that credit 
agencies have highlighted are the following:
• Historically, a very strong and diverse economy; 
• very strong management, with strong financial policies and practices 
• very strong budgetary flexibility, with strong reserves
• A multi-year financial forecast that is reviewed and revised regularly
• in anticipation of anticipated pandemic-induced revenue reductions, the City proactively implemented 
budget adjustments at the onset of the pandemic to limit the impact on reserves, 
DESCRIPTION  S&P  FITCH  MOODY’S 
Lease Revenue Bonds       
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, Series 2021 
(City Yards Modernization project) AA AA+
 
N/A 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, Series 
2021A&B AA AA+ Aa2
 
Santa Monica Public Finance Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, Series 2018  
(Downtown Fire Station Project) AA AA+  Aa1
Santa Monica Public Finance Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, Series 2017  
(City Services Building Project) (Green Bonds) AA AA+  Aa1 
Santa Monica Public Financing Authority Lease Revenue Bonds, Series 2015  
(Civic Center Parking Project) AA AA+ Aa2
Revenue Bonds     
City of Santa Monica Wastewater Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 2021 AAA  N/A  N/A
The City has issued various bonds, primarily to support construction of City capital projects. 
Below is a summary of the current ratings on the City’s outstanding debt.


===== PAGE 336 =====

320
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
A short-term liability account reflecting amounts owed to private persons or organizations for goods and services 
received by a government. 
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
An asset account reflecting amounts due from private persons or organizations for goods and services furnished by 
a government (but not including amounts due from other funds or other governments). 
ACCRUAL BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
A basis of accounting that recognizes the financial effect of transactions, events, and interfund activities when they 
occur, regardless of when cash transactions occur. 
ADOPTED BUDGET
The City Council approved annual budget establishing the legal authority for the expenditure of funds as set forth 
in the adopting Council budget resolution. 
AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN ACT OF 2021 (ARPA) 
On March 11, 2021, President Joseph R. Biden signed into law the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, a $1.9 
trillion federal aid package designed to help the American people and American economy recover from the 
prolonged impacts felt from COviD-19. This legislation provides direct payments to eligible individuals, extends 
federal supplemental unemployment benefits, increases funding for the Paycheck Protection Program, provides 
funds for housing stabilization and to address homelessness, and provides funds to help schools reopen safely and 
for COviD-19 testing, vaccination, and treatment, among a number of other provisions that assist local businesses 
and individuals who have been impacted by the pandemic. The legislation also includes $350 billion in direct 
financial relief for all state, local, tribal, and territorial governments, $29.3 million of which has been allocated to 
the City of Santa Monica.  
AMORTIZATION
The process of decreasing or allocating a lump sum amount over a period of time, particularly for loans and other 
forms of finance, including related interest and other finance charges. 
ANNUAL COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL REPORT (ACFR) 
The official annual report of the City’s financial condition at the conclusion of the fiscal year. The report is prepared 
to conform to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) for governmental units and presentation of the 
financial data in conformity with the Adopted Budget. 
APPROPRIATION
Legal authorization, as required by the City Charter, granted to the City Manager by the City Council to expend 
monies, and/or to incur legal obligations for specific departmental purposes. An appropriation is usually limited in 
amount, as well as to the time when it may be expended. 


===== PAGE 337 =====

321
ASSESSED VALUATION 
A dollar value placed upon real estate or other property by Los Angeles County as a basis for levying property 
taxes. 
ASSETS
Property owned by a government, which has monetary value. 
AUDIT
Prepared by an independent certified public accountant (CPA), the primary objective of an audit is to determine 
if the City’s financial statements fairly present the City’s financial position and results of operations in conformity 
with generally accepted accounting principles. 
AUTHORIZED POSITIONS
Permanent positions authorized in the budget to be employed during the fiscal year. 
BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
The timing of recognition, that is, when the effects of transactions or events are recognized for financial reporting 
or budgeting purposes. The three basis of accounting for governmental agencies are: (1) cash basis (when cash is 
received or paid), (2) accrual basis (when the underlying transaction or event takes place), and (3) modified accrual 
basis (revenues are recognized in the accounting period in which they become available and measurable and 
expenditures are recognized in the accounting period in which the fund liability occurred). 
BALANCE SHEET
A statement purporting to present the financial position of an entity by disclosing the value of its assets, liabilities, 
and equities as of a specific date. 
BALANCED BUDGET
When the total of revenues and other financing sources is equal to or greater than the total of expenditures and 
other financing uses, the budget is balanced. 
BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
Fund balance available in a fund from the end of the prior year for use in the following year. 
BOND
A city may raise capital by issuing a written promise to pay a specified sum of money, called the face value or 
principal amount, at a specified date or dates in the future, together with periodic interest at a special rate. 
BOND RATING
An evaluation of a bond issuer’s credit quality and perceived ability to pay the principal and interest on time and in 
full. Two agencies regularly review city bonds and generate bond ratings:  Moody’s investors Service and Standard 
and Poor’s Ratings Group.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 338 =====

322
BUDGET
A plan of financial and program operation listing an estimate of proposed appropriations or expenses and the 
proposed means of financing them, for a particular time period. The budget is proposed or preliminary until it has 
been adopted by the City Council. 
BUDGET ADOPTION
Formal action by the City Council, which sets the Spending Path for the year. 
BUDGET CALENDAR
The schedule of key dates or milestones that a government follows in preparation and adoption of a budget. 
BUDGETARY CONTROL
The control or management of a government or enterprise in accordance with an approved budget for the purpose 
of keeping expenditures within the limitations of available appropriations and revenues. 
CALPERS
State of California Public Employees’ Retirement System. 
CAPITAL ASSET
A tangible, fixed asset that is long-term in nature, of significant value, and obtained or controlled as a result of 
past transactions, events or circumstances. Fixed assets include land, buildings, equipment, improvements to 
buildings, and infrastructure (i.e., streets, highways, bridges, and other immovable assets). A capital asset is defined 
as an asset with a useful life extending beyond a single accounting period. 
CAPITAL BUDGET 
A financial plan of proposed capital improvement projects and the means of financing them for a given period of 
time. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP) 
improvements that cost over $50,000 and have a useful life of 3 years or more, or involve public works 
construction. The City may own completed projects, or the City may maintain a legal interest in the completed 
project. Examples of projects owned by the City include a new park, street resurfacing, modifications to buildings, 
and construction of water mains. An example of a project in which the City maintains a legal interest is a privately 
owned housing project with an outstanding promissory note to the City. 
CARES ACT 
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act is federal legislation signed into law on March 27, 2020, in 
response to the COviD-19 emergency. Under the CARES Act, emergency assistance via one-time cash payments, 
increased and expanded unemployment payments, loans, and grants was provided to individuals and families, 
businesses, public health, local and state governments, and educational institutions.  
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 339 =====

323
CASH BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
A basis of accounting that recognizes revenues and expenses when cash is received or disbursed. 
CERTIFICATES OF PARTICIPATION (COPS) 
This financing technique provides long-term financing through a lease, installment sale agreement or loan 
agreement. Certificates of Participation (COPs) allow the public to purchase (in $5,000 increments) participation 
in a stream of lease payments, installment payments or loan payments relating to the acquisition or construction 
of specific equipment, land or facilities. An example would be COPs sold by the City to finance various Third Street 
Promenade-related improvements. 
CITY CHARTER
Legal authority approved in 1946 by the voters of Santa Monica under the State of California Constitution defining 
the organization, powers, functions, and essential procedures of the city government. The charter established the 
current "Council - Manager" form of government. 
CITY MANAGER’S MESSAGE
A general discussion of the proposed budget as presented in writing by the City Manager to the City Council. The 
message contains an explanation of the principal budget items and summarizes the proposed budget relative to 
the current year adopted budget. 
COMMUNITY PRIORITIES
Strategic work objectives that require collaborative action by several City departments and partnerships with other 
elements of the community. 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (CPI)
A statistical description of price levels provided by the U.S Department of Labor. The change in this index from year 
to year is used to measure the cost of living and economic inflation. 
CONTINGENCY
A budgetary reserve set aside for emergency or unanticipated expenditures, revenue shortfalls, and/or unknown 
expenditures. 
CERTIFIED UNIFIED PROGRAM AGENCY (CUPA)
Senate Bill 1082, passed in 1993, created the Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management 
Regulatory Program (Unified Program), which requires the administrative consolidation of six hazardous materials 
and waste programs under one agency, a Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA). 
DEPARTMENT
An operational and budgetary unit designated by the City Council to define and organize City operations, or a 
group of related operations within a functional area. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 340 =====

324
DEBT
An obligation resulting from the borrowing of money or from the purchase of goods and services. Debts of 
governments include bonds, time warrants, and notes. 
DEBT FINANCING
issuance of bonds and other debt instruments to finance municipal improvements and services. 
DEBT SERVICE
Debt service refers to the interest and principal payments on bond issues and Certificate of Participation, and 
includes the issuance costs related to bond funding. 
DEFICIT
The excess of an entity’s liabilities over its assets, or the excess of expenditures or expenses over revenue during a 
single accounting period. 
DEPRECIATION
(1) Expiration in the service life of capital outlay assets attributable to wear and tear, deterioration, action of the 
physical elements, inadequacy or obsolescence. (2) The portion of the cost of a capital asset that is charged as an 
expense during a particular period. 
DIVISION
An organizational unit consisting of program(s) or activity(ies) within a department which furthers the objectives 
of the City Council by providing services or a product. 
ENCUMBRANCE
Financial commitments related to unperformed contracts for goods or services for which part of an appropriation is 
reserved. They cease to be encumbrances when the obligations are paid or otherwise terminated. 
ENTERPRISE FUND
A type of fund established to account for the total costs of those governmental facilities and services which are 
operated in a manner similar to private enterprises. These funds are entirely or predominately self-supporting. 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT (EIR)
An analysis of the environmental implications related to a specific action. For example, the increase in traffic in an 
area proposed for new development. 
EXPENDITURE
The payment made for cost of services rendered, materials, equipment, and capital improvements. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 341 =====

325
EXPENSE
Charges incurred (whether paid immediately or unpaid) for operations, maintenance, interest, or other charges. 
EXPENSE CATEGORY
Two expense object categories:  Salaries and Wages; and Supplies and Expenses. 
FEE
The payment for direct receipt of a public service by the party who benefits from the service. 
FIDUCIARY FUND
A fund type to report assets held in a trustee or agency capacity for others and which therefore cannot be used 
to support the government’s own programs. The fiduciary fund category includes pension, trust funds, investment 
trust funds, private-purpose trust funds, and agency funds. 
FISCAL YEAR (FY)
A twelve-month accounting period of time to which the budget applies; for Santa Monica, it is July 1 through June 
30. 
FRINGE BENEFITS
Benefits including employee retirement, health, dental, vision, life insurance, workers’ compensation, uniforms, and 
deferred compensation plans. 
FTE
Full Time Equivalent Employee (FTE) Hours per year = 1.0 Full-Time Equivalent position. 
FUND
An independent fiscal and accounting entity used to record all financial transactions related to the specific purpose 
for which the fund was created. There are three major types of fund:  Governmental (general, special revenue, debt 
service, capital projects, and permanent), Proprietary (enterprise and internal service), and Fiduciary (trust and 
agency). 
FUND BALANCE
The amount of financial resources immediately available for use. Generally, this represents the excess of 
unrestricted current assets over current liabilities. 
GANN APPROPRIATION LIMIT
Article XiiiB of the State constitution was amended by Proposition 4 (Gann initiative) in 1979.   Article XiiiB limits 
growth in the spending of tax proceeds to tax proceeds appropriated in the "base year" of 1978-79 times the 
product of the allowable annual percentage change in a cost-of-living factor and the allowable annual percentage 
change in a population change factor. The cost-of-living factor is the larger of the annual percentage change 
in the State per capita personal income or the annual percentage change in the local non-residential assessed 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 342 =====

326
valuation due to new construction. The population change factor is the larger of the annual percentage change of 
the jurisdiction's population or the annual percentage population change of the county in which the jurisdiction is 
located. 
GENERAL FUND
The primary fund of the City used to account for all revenues and expenditures of the City not legally restricted as 
to use. Examples of departments financed by the General Fund include City Council, Police and Fire Departments. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
A type of bond that is backed by the full faith, credit, and taxing power of the City. 
GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES (GAAP)
Uniform minimum standards and guidelines for financial accounting and reporting. They govern the form and 
content of the financial statements of an entity. GAAP encompass the conventions, rules, and procedures necessary 
to define accepted accounting practice at a particular time. They include not only broad guidelines of general 
application, but also detailed practices and procedures. GAAP provide a standard by which to measure financial 
presentations. The primary authoritative body on the application of GAAP to state and local governments is the 
GASB. 
GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING
The composite activity of analyzing, recording, summarizing, reporting, and interpreting the financial transactions 
of governments. 
GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD (GASB)
The authoritative accounting and financial reporting standard-setting body for government entities. 
GOVERNMENTAL FUND
A fund type to account for tax-supported activities. There are five different types of governmental funds:  the 
general fund, special revenue funds, debt service funds, capital projects funds, and permanent funds. 
GRANT
Contributions or gifts of cash or other assets from another governmental entity to be used or expended for a 
specific purpose, activity or facility. An example is the Community Development Block Grant awarded by the 
Federal government. 
INDIRECT COST ALLOCATION PLAN
The City uses an indirect cost allocation plan to ensure that enterprises and certain special revenue supported 
operations pay for themselves and are not subsidized by City taxpayers. General fund supported central services 
costs such as payroll, accounting, data processing, personnel, city management and facilities maintenance are 
allocated to those funds benefiting from these services based on statistical data reflecting use of these support 
services. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 343 =====

327
INFRASTRUCTURE
Facilities on which the continuance and growth of a community depend on such as roads, water lines, sewers, 
public buildings, parks and airports. 
INTERFUND TRANSACTIONS
These budgetary transactions consist of quasi-external transactions which would be treated as revenues and 
expenditures if they involved organizations external to the governmental unit, reimbursements of expenditures 
initially made in one fund which are attributable to another fund, and operating transfers where monies are 
appropriated from one fund to another fund to reimburse expenses which are of benefit to the first fund. 
INTERNAL SERVICE FUND
Funds used to account for the financing of goods or services provided by one department or agency to other 
departments or agencies of a government, on a cost-reimbursement basis. 
LEED
The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating System® is a voluntary, 
consensus-based national standard for developing high-performance and sustainable buildings. 
LEGAL DEBT LIMIT
Per section 6.07 of the City Charter, bonded indebtedness of the City may not exceed 10% of the total assessed 
valuation of property within the City, exclusive of any indebtedness incurred for the purpose of water supply or 
sewers or storm drains. 
LIABILITY
Debt or other legal obligations arising out of transactions in the past which must be liquidated, renewed, or 
refunded at some future date. Note:  This term does not include encumbrances. 
LINE ITEM DETAIL
A budget that lists detailed expenditure categories (permanent salaries, utilities, travel, training, etc.) separately, 
along with the amount budgeted for each specified category. 
LONG-TERM DEBT
Debt with a maturity of more than one year after the date of issue. 
MEASURE A
Measure A imposes a 0.50% sales tax to reduce and prevent homelessness and increase the supply of affordable 
housing in the County of Los Angeles.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 344 =====

328
MEASURE CS 
On November 8, 2022, voters approved Measure CS, a ballot measure increasing the Transient Occupancy Tax, paid 
by overnight visitors, by 1% for hotels and motels, and by 3% for homeshares. The tax increase became effective 
March 1, 2023. 
MEASURE F
Approved by Santa Monica voters on November 5, 2024, Measure F modernizes the Business License Tax 
ordinance to improve tax equity and fairness, exempt small businesses from the tax, decrease tax rates for most 
retailers and restaurants, raise the corporate headquarters rate to 0.25%, remove auto dealer tax exemptions, and 
restore a business license processing fee.
MEASURES GS AND GSH (2016) 
Measure GSH, approved by Santa Monica voters in November 2016, increased the City’s transaction and use tax 
rate by half a percent point. Per the advisory Measure GS (2016), one-half of the proceeds from the increased 
portion of the tax will be used for affordable housing with the other half paid to the Santa Monica/Malibu Unified 
School District. The tax increase became effective April 1, 2017. 
MEASURES GS (2022) 
On November 8, 2022, voters approved a citizens’ initiative ballot measure that enacts a third tier Documentary 
Transfer Tax of an additional 5% for property sales over $8 million, with revenue restricted to fund homelessness 
prevention, affordable housing projects, and schools. The tax became effective on March 1, 2023.
MEASURE HMP
Measure HMP , approved by Santa Monica voters on November 8, 2022, establishes the Cannabis Business Tax on 
every licensed cannabis business and retailers of products containing psychoactive cannabinoids, operating within 
the City. Non-medicinal cannabis retailers are taxed at 3% of gross receipts, medicinal cannabis retailers are taxed 
at 2%, and other licensed cannabis retailers (involved in distribution, manufacturing, cultivation, or laboratory 
testing) are taxed at 1%, with a maximum tax rate of 10% at the discretion of City Council. While this tax is 
currently in effect, there are no recreational cannabis-related retail establishments in Santa Monica. 
MEASURE K
On November 5, 2024, Santa Monica voters approved Measure K, which raises the City’s Parking Facility Tax rate 
to 18% for users including visitors and tourists, with revenue restricted to enhance public safety, create safe routes 
to school to protect children, lower the risk of fatal traffic accidents, and maintain other essential city services. The 
tax became effective on January 1, 2025.
MEASURE PSK
Measure PSK is an advisory measure that allows voters to provide advice to the City Council on how half of any 
increased parking facility tax revenue from the Parking Facility Tax Measure should be used as it relates to public 
safety and addressing homelessness.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 345 =====

329
MEASURE R
Measure R increases the sales tax rate by half a percent point in Los Angeles County for 30 years to provide 
funding for new transportation projects and programs and accelerate the ones already in the works. Aimed to 
bring traffic relief and transportation upgrades throughout the County, the ballot measure was approved by voters 
in November 2006 and went into effect July 1, 2009. 
MEASURE V
The Clean Beaches and Ocean Parcel Tax was approved by Santa Monica voters in November 2006. The tax raises 
revenue to be used solely for the purpose of implementing the City’s Watershed Management Plan for the health, 
safety, and general welfare of the residents. 
MEASURE Y
Measure Y is a one-half percent transaction and use tax approved by voters in November 2010 which is projected 
to generate approximately $12 million in new revenue annually for the City. 
MEASURE YY
Measure YY was an advisory measure on the use of revenues from the transaction and use tax proposed under 
Measure Y . Measure YY specifies that if a local transaction and use tax was enacted in the City of Santa Monica, 
half of its revenue should be used to support school, educational and afterschool programs, and half of its revenue 
should be used to fund general City services. 
MISSION
A description of the basic purpose and responsibility of the division or department. 
MODIFIED ACCRUAL BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
A basis of accounting. Revenues are recognized in the accounting period in which they become available and 
measurable; expenditures are recognized in the accounting period in which the fund liability is incurred (if 
measurable), except for unmatured interest on general long-term debt and certain similar accrued obligations, 
which should be recognized when due. 
MUNICIPAL CODE
A compilation of City Council approved ordinances currently in effect. The Code defines City policy in various 
categories, for example, Civil Service rules, traffic regulations, sanitation and health standards, building regulations, 
and planning and zoning regulations. 
OPERATING BUDGET
A financial, programmatic and organizational plan for furthering the goals of the City Council through the 
departments of the City, which does not include one-time capital improvements projects. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 346 =====

330
ORDINANCE
A formal legislative enactment by the City Council. it has the full force and effect of law within the City boundaries 
unless it is in conflict with any higher form of law such as a State statute or constitutional provision. An ordinance 
has higher legal standing than a resolution. 
PATIENT PROTECTION AND AFFORDABLE CARE ACT (PPACA)
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010 
and is aimed at increasing the rate of health insurance coverage for Americans and reducing the overall costs of 
health care. The PPACA is commonly referred to as Obamacare.  
PAY-AS-YOU-GO BASIS
A term used to describe a financial policy by which capital outlays are financed from current revenues rather than 
through borrowing. 
PROGRAM
An activity or division within a department which furthers the City’s objectives by providing services or a product. 
PROJECT
A temporary, unique action that has a defined beginning and end, with a defined scope and resources.  Success is 
measured by the completion of milestones. 
PROPOSITION A AND PROPOSITION C (PROP A & PROP C) 
Proposition A and Proposition C programs are two one-half cent sales tax measures approved by Los Angeles 
County voters to finance a countywide transit development program. 
PROPRIETARY FUND
Funds that focus on the determination of operating income, changes in net assets (cost recovery), financial 
position, and cash flows. There are two types of proprietary funds:  Enterprise and internal Service Funds. 
PURCHASE ORDER
A document issued to authorize a vendor to deliver specified merchandise or render a specified service for a stated 
estimated price. Outstanding purchase orders are called encumbrances. 
RE-APPROPRIATION
The amount of money that is budgeted for a project in a prior year but is not spent or encumbered and needs to be 
appropriated again in the current year in order to continue the program originally intended. 
REIMBURSEMENTS
Payments of amounts remitted on behalf of another party, department or fund. They are recorded as expenditures 
or expenses in the reimbursing fund and as reductions of the expenditure or expense in the fund that is reimbursed 
(see interfund Transactions). 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 347 =====

331
RESERVE
An account used to set aside a portion of the fund balance as legally segregated for a specific use. 
RESOLUTION
A special order of the City Council which requires less legal formality than an ordinance in terms of public notice 
and the number of public readings prior to approval. A resolution has lower legal standing than an ordinance. 
The adopted City budget is approved by resolution and requires a majority vote of the councilmembers present 
at budget adoption time. During the fiscal year other budget modifications made by the City Council require a 
majority plus one vote. 
REVENUE
Sources of income used to finance City governmental services. 
SALARIES AND WAGES
A budget category which generally accounts for full-time, part-time, and temporary employees’ salaries, overtime 
costs, and fringe benefits for a particular division or program. 
SELF-INSURANCE
A term often used to describe the retention by an entity of a risk of loss arising out of the ownership of property or 
the activity of the agency. 
SERVICES
A grouping of activities with common business goals organized by divisions. 
SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS
A Special Revenue Fund is separately administered because restrictions have been placed on how revenues may 
be spent by the City Council, the State of California or the Federal government. Two examples are the State of 
California Gas Tax Fund and Federal government Community Development Block Grant funds. 
SUPPLIES AND EXPENSES
A budget category which accounts for all non-personnel expenses. Examples include office supplies, utility costs, 
legal advertising, equipment maintenance, small tool purchases, building/structure maintenance, and contractual 
services. 
TAXES
Compulsory charges levied by a governmental unit for the purpose of financing services performed for the 
common benefit. This term does not include charges for services rendered only to those paying such charges, for 
example refuse collection. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 348 =====

332
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
Transportation impact Fee (TiF) is for new development and intensified land uses that will fund transportation 
improvements such as new sidewalks, crosswalks, traffic signal upgrades, transit, and bicycle facilities that are 
necessitated by the new trips associated with land use change. 
TRUST FUNDS
Types of fiduciary funds which account for assets held by the City in a trustee capacity. The budget does not 
appropriate fiduciary funds. 
VEHICLE LICENSE FEE
vehicle License Fee (vLF) is an annual fee on the ownership of a registered vehicle in California. it has been 
assessed on all privately owned registered vehicles in California in place of taxing vehicles as personal property 
since 1935. The vLF is paid to the Department of Motor vehicles (DMv) at the time of annual vehicle registration. 
A portion of vLF had traditionally been apportioned to cities on a per capita basis. However, effective July 1, 2011, 
virtually all vLF revenues previously apportioned to cities were shifted to fund law enforcement grants as a part of 
efforts to solve the State’s chronic budget problems. 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GLOSSARY


===== PAGE 349 =====

333
AB 
Assembly Bill 
ARPA 
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021
ATMS 
Advanced Traffic Management System 
AVR 
Average vehicle Ridership 
B&S
Building and Safety 
CAC
California Arts Council 
CALPERS / PERS
California Public Employees’ Retirement System 
CAM
Common Area Maintenance 
CARES
Coronavirus, Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act 
of 2020 
CBB
Community Broadband 
CDBG
Community Development Block Grant 
CIP
Capital improvement Program 
COG 
Council of Governments 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - ACRONYMS
COLA
Cost of Living Adjustment 
COPS
Citizens’ Option for Public Safety 
CPI
Consumer Price index 
CRD
Community Recreation Division 
CREST
Childcare Recreation Enrichment Sports Together 
CUPA
Certified Unified Program Agency 
EIR
Environmental impact Report 
EOC
Emergency Operations Center
ERAF
Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund 
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
FTE
Full Time Equivalent
GAP
Grant Acceleration Program 
GAAP
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 


===== PAGE 350 =====

334
GASB
Governmental Accounting Standards Board 
GDP
Gross Domestic Product 
GFOA
Government Finance Officers Association
GIS
Geographical information Systems 
HHSD
Housing and Human Services Division 
HHW
Household Hazardous Waste  
HLP
Homeless Liaison Program 
HMG
Hazardous Mitigation Grants 
HMRRP
Haz-Mat Response and Reporting Program 
HOME
Federal Home investment Partnership Program 
HUD
Department of Housing and Urban Development 
 
LACMTA
Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation 
Authority 
LAEDC
Los Angeles County Economic Development 
Corporation 
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 
LLEBG
Local Law Enforcement Block Grants Program 
MOE
Maintenance of Effort 
MOU
Memorandum of Understanding 
MTA
Metropolitan Transportation Authority 
MWD
Metropolitan Water District 
OEM
Office of Emergency Management 
OSE
Office of Sustainability and the Environment 
OTS
California Office of Traffic Safety 
PAL
Police Activities League 
PEG
Public, Educational, and Government 
PNA
Pico Neighborhood Association 
PPACA
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Frequently 
referred to as Obamacare.
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - ACRONYMS


===== PAGE 351 =====

335
PROP A & PROP C
Proposition A and Proposition C.
RA
Recreation and Arts
RDA 
Redevelopment Agency 
SA
Successor Agency 
SB
Senate Bill 
SCAQMD 
South Coast Air Quality Management District 
SMMUSD 
Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District 
SMURRF
Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling Facility 
TDA
Transportation Development Act 
TDM
Traffic Demand Management 
TEA
Transportation Equity Act 
TIF
Transportation impact Fee
TMP
Transportation Management Program
TORCA
Tenant Ownership Rights Charter Amendment
VLF
vehicle License Fee 
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - ACRONYMS


===== PAGE 352 =====

336
FY 2025-27 PROPOSED BiENNiAL BUDGET
APPENDiX - GFOA AWARD
The Government Finance Officers Association of the United States and Canada (GFOA) presented a Distinguished 
Budget Presentation Award to City of Santa Monica, California for its biennial budget for the biennium beginning 
July 1, 2021. in order to receive this award, a government unit must publish a budget document that meets program 
criteria as a policy document, as an operations guide, as a financial plan, and as a communications device. 
This award is valid for a period of two years only. We believe our current budget continues to conform to program 
requirements, and we are submitting it to GFOA to determine its eligibility for the biennium beginning July 1, 2023.
PRESENTED TO
City of Santa Monica
California
For the Biennium Beginning
July 01, 2023
Executive Director
GOVERNMENT FINANCE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
Distinguished
Budget Presentation
Award


===== PAGE 353 =====

